                            FOR PUBLIC RELEASE




              Integrated Country Strategy




                                 NEPAL




                            FOR PUBLIC RELEASE




Approved: April 1, 2022
                            FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                    FOR PUBLIC RELEASE




   Table of Contents

  1. Chief of Mission Priorities                          1
  2. Mission Strategic Framework                          4
  3. Mission Goals and Objectives                         6
  4. Management Objectives                               22




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                    FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                              Page 1 of 23


   1. Chief of Mission Priorities

Nepal is a landlocked and fragile democracy located in a geopolitically delicate space between
China and India. Nearly 75 years of U.S. engagement has supported Nepal’s transition to a
more peaceful, stable, and prosperous democracy. Since the end of its 1996-2006 civil war and
the earthquakes of 2015, Nepal has taken great strides to institutionalize its democracy. With a
new constitution in 2015 and successful elections in 2017, Nepal has the opportunity to create
a more stable political system and democracy. Since the 2017 elections, the government
changed in July 2021 via a parliamentary no confidence vote, and despite significant turmoil,
the judicial and constitutional systems provided political solutions. Regularly scheduled
elections in 2022 are likely to produce another coalition government. The United States is
uniquely positioned to share proven, credible, and persuasive best practices and models of
performance to help build Nepal’s capacity and to critically assess and deploy reforms in the
political, economic, security, and social realms to jointly advance our shared objectives.

Still, Nepal’s challenges are many. If left unaddressed, endemic corruption, the ongoing and
uneven transition to a federal structure, an uncompetitive investment regime, societal
inequities and persistent grievances, rampant impunity, weak border security, geopolitical
complexities, climate change, and frequent natural disasters will continue to render Nepal
vulnerable to instability and impede development. Our aim over the next four years is to
support Nepal’s stability, democratic reform agenda, and sovereignty so it can develop into a
strong, reliable, and resilient partner contributing to U.S. and regional security and prosperity.

Our first goal is to strengthen good governance; democratic values; and security and stability
in Nepal. Instability and insecurity in the heart of Asia are threats to U.S. interests. Sustainable
security and stability will require not only developing security sector institutions’ capacity, but
deeply embedding democratic principles of inclusive and accountable governance into Nepal’s
young democratic institutions. Through capacity building and joint efforts, our security
cooperation supports disaster preparedness, humanitarian response, counterterrorism,
professionalization, and global peacekeeping. Training and exchanges provide specific skills and
strengthen the rule of law to promote border and internal security. More broadly, diplomatic

Approved: April 1, 2022
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                             Page 2 of 23


engagements and development assistance that bolster citizen-responsive governance,
encourage capable oversight and accountability, and build capacity will vest society in the
country’s success, reduce grievances, and enhance national stability. A more capable national
government and security sector will enhance regional security and deter malign influence by
state and non-state actors.

Our second priority is to support inclusive, equitable economic growth and a clean, resilient
energy future in Nepal. Social grievances and political instability have impeded development:
per capita income is one of the lowest in Asia, and about 15 percent of Nepalis live in poverty.
Lack of opportunity leads millions to work overseas resulting in an economy unsustainably
fueled by remittances. Despite ample arable land and massive hydropower and tourism
potential, economic take-off is hindered by an unconducive business environment. The COVID-
19 pandemic has undermined economic growth, eroded progress across sectors, and diverted
resources and the attention of Government of Nepal (GON) and other stakeholders. Our
diplomatic and development efforts will support the GoN’s reform commitments to create an
enabling environment for trade and investment, combat corruption, ensure energy and food
security, safeguard the environment, and mitigate the effects of climate change. Technical
expertise will inform our market-oriented policy advocacy. Our investments will strengthen
local governments’ ability to deliver quality education and health services – vital to ensuring
sustainable economic growth – and improve Nepal’s capability to recover from the COVID-19
pandemic and prepare for future disasters and pandemics. In a region beset by natural
disasters and hit hard by climate change, we will continue to give humanitarian relief in times of
crisis while strengthening Nepal’s ability to mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from
shocks that threaten stability and past gains. Assistance programs will pilot and model
productivity and efficiency gains, particularly in the areas of agriculture, private sector growth,
and natural resources management. Our Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) compact
will build electricity transmission lines to link power generation with industry, homes, and
export markets while creating opportunities for U.S. companies. While Parliamentary
ratification of the MCC agreement finally occurred in February 2022 after delays caused by
internal politics and malign foreign disinformation, the United States will now focus on moving

Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                         FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                              Page 3 of 23


towards implementation. Focused U.S. assistance investments will contribute to a healthy,
educated, and resilient population that contributes to sustainable development, supporting
Nepal’s economic security, and making it more attractive for U.S. investments and exports.

To enable and entrench the above goals, the United States’ third priority will be to work to
help Nepal become more self-reliant, independent, and resilient as it confronts global
challenges. Public diplomacy initiatives will engage the Nepali government, civil society, and
the private sector to shape public opinion in support of democratic values and institutions, a
strong market economy, and transparent and accountable governance – in the face of internal
and external challenges. We will also continue to always provide American citizens with top
quality services, regardless of their location in Nepal, and stronger government institutions at
both the local and national level will benefit U.S. citizens living in and visiting Nepal. We will
pursue all our goals and objectives through diplomatic engagement and close coordination
with likeminded countries and multilateral organizations. Finally, we will support Nepal in
becoming a more active and engaged partner in international fora, improving voting
congruence with the U.S. and other democracies, adhering to international agreements and
commitments, and furthering initiatives to strengthen regional connectivity.

All goals will benefit from the incorporation of cross cutting themes essential to achieving
meaningful change in Nepal and to advancing a shared set of values. These include
promoting gender and social inclusion (GESI), combating corruption and promoting
accountability, supporting sound public financial management, planning the transition from
foreign assistance to independence, and ensuring accountability to the American taxpayer.




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                            Page 4 of 23


   2. Mission Strategic Framework

Mission Goal 1: Strengthen good governance; democratic values; and security
and stability in Nepal.

   •   Mission Objective 1.1: Nepal strengthens its promotion and protection of the equal
       rights of women, youth, Dalits, and other marginalized groups, consistent with
       international norms.
   •   Mission Objective 1.2: Nepal’s democratic institutions strengthen the rule of law;
       implement the Constitution; and are more independent, transparent, inclusive, and
       accountable to its citizens.
   •   Mission Objective 1.3: Nepal increases its capacity to counter threats to its security
       interests and become a stable partner in a rules-based regional and international order.


Mission Goal 2: Advance inclusive, equitable economic growth and a clean,
resilient energy future in Nepal.

   •   Mission Objective 2.1: Nepal increases rules-based trade, competitiveness, and cross-
       border cooperation, thus advancing inclusive and sustainable economic growth and
       reducing extreme poverty.
   •   Mission Objective 2.2: Nepal improves health and education outcomes to create a
       more inclusive society and productive economy.
   •   Mission Objective 2.3: Nepal addresses major climate and disaster risks, accelerates
       clean energy development, and safeguards natural resources for environmentally
       sustainable and more equitable economic growth.


Mission Goal 3: Help Nepal become more self-reliant, independent, and resilient
as it confronts global challenges.




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                      FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                                 Page 5 of 23


   •   Mission Objective 3.1: Nepal becomes a more active, engaged, and autonomous
       partner in international fora, adheres to international agreements and commitments,
       and promotes regional connectivity.
   •   Mission Objective 3.2: Nepali public opinion is shaped through robust government, civil
       society, and private sector engagement that is free from repression, censorship, and
       resilient against state-sponsored disinformation and coercion.
   •   Mission Objective 3.3: Nepal improves coordination of assistance and services to
       Nepalis and U.S. citizens in Nepal, at all times, and particularly during crises.


Management Objective 1: Modernize information technology resources and
tools to increase collaboration, improve service delivery, and enhance internal
controls.

Management Objective 2: Operational effectiveness and efficiency enhanced
through physical workspace modernization, innovative design concepts, and
increased accessibility.

Management Objective 3: Mission performance and effectiveness enhanced
through a diverse, equitable, inclusive, and accessible workplace.




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                              Page 6 of 23


   3. Mission Goals and Objectives

Mission Goal 1 | Strengthen good governance; democratic values; and security
and stability in Nepal.

Description | Our engagement with Nepal’s elected officials, government officials and
institutions, private sector, and civil society will aim to strengthen democratic principles of
inclusive, accountable governance, the protection and promotion of human rights, security, and
the rule of law. Our diplomatic engagements and development assistance to bolster citizen-
responsive governance and build capacity will counter instability, corruption and nepotism that
could threaten U.S. interests and vest society in the country’s success. Vibrant oversight by
Nepali media and civil society organizations of government institutions is critical to achieving
these U.S. priority objectives. Our security cooperation with the Nepali Army, police, and
judiciary will build capacity in disaster preparedness and response, humanitarian assistance,
and counterterrorism, and support Nepal’s contributions to global peacekeeping. Through law
enforcement, judicial, and prosecutorial training, we will strengthen the rule of law through
evidence-based criminal investigations and prosecutions; we will also provide training and
equipment to improve Nepal’s border and airport security, thereby strengthening U.S. security.
These efforts will help secure the nation’s borders and counter threats to Nepal’s sovereignty
and domestic and regional security, carry out the complicated task of implementing federalism,
combat transnational crime, and help Nepal become a more confident and self-reliant regional
and global actor.

Objective 1.1 | Nepal strengthens its promotion and protection of the equal rights of women,
youth, Dalits, and other marginalized groups, consistent with international norms.

   •   Justification | Nepal’s stability is fragile, and there needs to be significant improvements
       in inclusion, transparency, and protection of human rights over the next four years to
       ensure it is preserved and maintained. To support Nepal’s stability, it is in the U.S.
       interest and strategic advantage to promote protection of human rights and the


Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                             Page 7 of 23


       completion of a credible transitional justice process to address conflict-era grievances,
       hold perpetrators of Gross Violations of Human Rights accountable, and advocate for
       reforms to make policies and governance more inclusive and equitable, especially to
       historically marginalized groups like Dalits. Inclusion of Nepal’s vastly diverse
       population in these activities is paramount to achieving this objective and so will be fully
       integrated into activities listed below.
   •   Linkages | Links to USAID Nepal Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS)
       DO1: More effective, participatory, and equitable democratic ecosystem. Links to SCA
       JRS BO 2.3: Promote and protect the rights of women, marginalized, and
       underrepresented populations as members of an inclusive democratic society. Links to
       Indo-Pacific Strategy Pillar 1 as published by the White House in February 2022: Advance
       a Free and Open Indo-Pacific.
   •   Risks | Institutional and cultural inertia challenge the ability to achieve change in Nepal.
       Institutionally, Nepal’s central government faces ongoing instability based on shifting
       loyalties that threaten coalition-based governance. The resulting dissolutions of
       Parliament, early elections and stalled policy change are continual speed bumps to
       needed reforms. Culturally, many in Nepal’s government do not view public office as
       public service but instead to promote self, family, and friends. Additionally, Nepal’s
       higher and mid-level government officials rotate frequently from one branch or agency
       to another, which limits decision-makers both in gaining substantive expertise and
       personal commitment to bring about change. Nepal’s government has been
       Kathmandu-centric for an extended period and notwithstanding the provisions for
       federalism in the 2015 Constitution, implementation of federalism, with its concurrent
       creation of greater responsiveness and accountability, has been slow and erratic.
       Failure to achieve objective 1.1 could increase instability in Nepal and reduce the
       effectiveness of its government. This risk can be mitigated by consistent and intensive
       follow up by Mission Nepal to ensure effective implementation of the activities under
       this objective.




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                              Page 8 of 23


Objective 1.2 | Nepal’s democratic institutions strengthen the rule of law; implement the
Constitution; and are more independent, transparent, inclusive, and accountable to its citizens.

   •   Justification | Without a holistic approach to developing more inclusive, transparent,
       and accountable governance, stability in Nepal will remain tenuous. With the 2015
       constitution in place and the completion of historic elections in 2017, Nepal is on the
       cusp of unprecedented stability as it commences the lengthy process of transitioning to
       a federal structure. Stability is a critical element for achieving all the Mission’s ICS
       Goals, as it sets the conditions necessary to effectively tackle long-overdue economic
       reform, secure the nation’s borders and counter threats to Nepal’s sovereignty and to
       domestic and regional security, carry out the complicated task of implementing
       federalism, combat transnational crime, and ensure that human rights are respected
       and protected. A failed or exclusionary transition to the new federal government
       structure, as well as growing corruption, could fuel social grievances or instability. It
       may also invite malign actors to take advantage of political and governance weakness in
       ways that contribute to corruption, disrespect for democratic norms, and the rule of
       law.
   •   Linkages | Links to CDCS DO1: More effective, participatory, and equitable democratic
       ecosystem. Links to SCA JRS BO 2.1: Reduce corruption; increase transparency,
       accountability, and efficacy in governance, in the provision of social services and the
       rule of law. Links to Indo-Pacific Strategy Pillar 1 as published by the White House in
       February 2022: Advance a Free and Open Indo-Pacific. Links to USAID 2022-2026 Joint
       Strategic Plan Strategic Objective 3.3: Prevent, Expose, and Reduce Corruption.
   •   Risks | Central government does not adequately devolve authority and resources,
       limiting sub-national entities’ ability to carry out their mandates (recentralization).
       COVID-19 continues to strain democratic systems (elections, faith in representatives,
       and the government’s ability to provide critical services) and the socio-economic
       stability of Nepal, causing serious fractures within the country’s democracy and stability.
       Marginalized communities are not sufficiently included in the decision making and
       political processes. The government could restrict media and civil society freedom

Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                                Page 9 of 23


       through new legislation and policies, closing the space for civic and media action.
       Increased corruption at all levels raises overall distrust in governance systems increasing
       disenfranchisement and destabilizing Nepal at different levels. Failure to implement
       objective 1.2 could result in increased political instability and waste of government
       resources. This risk can be mitigated by effective implementation of the activities under
       this objective, particularly through partnering with civil society institutions.

Objective 1.3 | Nepal increases its capacity to counter threats to its security interests and
become a stable partner in a rules-based regional and international order.

   •   Justification | Given its geostrategic location, our support will be vital to underpinning
       Nepal’s contribution to regional security and to deterring malign influence exercised
       against Nepal and the region, by state and non-state actors. Nepal’s long, porous
       southern border makes it vulnerable to the threat of terrorism and transnational crime,
       including smuggling of people and other contraband, necessitating increasing the
       capacity of its security sector institutions. At the same time, a relative dearth of security
       sector presence along its northern border leaves Nepal open to provocative or coercive
       military or gray zone activity, which may pose threats to its sovereignty. Highly prone to
       natural disasters such as earthquakes, landslides, floods and wildfires, Nepal will need to
       increase the capacity of its institutions that can respond to and mitigate such risks,
       particularly as climate change exacerbates these vulnerabilities. Supporting Nepal’s
       already robust participation in United Nations (UN) Peacekeeping Operations through
       training and equipment, as well as through advocacy with the UN to accept Nepal’s
       standing offer for increased participation and for greater leadership roles, will lead to
       more professional, capable, and interoperable security sector institutions that can
       contribute to regional security, for example through humanitarian assistance and
       disaster relief operations in the area. Strengthening Nepal’s justice sector institutions’
       investigative and prosecutorial capacity will reduce Nepal’s vulnerability to transnational
       criminal threats while also improving its citizenry’s perceptions of the rule of law,
       helping to consolidate its democracy. At the same time, the judicious application of U.S.


Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                              Page 10 of 23


       immigration law while building collaborative relationships with partners in the Nepali
       government and security institutions will strengthen U.S. border security and the safety
       of Americans in Nepal.
   •   Linkages | Links to SCA JRS BO 4.1: Strengthen the capacity and political will of South
       and Central Asian allies and partners to independently manage their own security
       challenges and support a rules-based regional and international order. Links to Indo-
       Pacific Strategy Pillar 5 as published by the White House in February 2022: Build
       Regional Resilience to 21st-Century Transnational Threats. Links to Consular Affairs
       Functional Bureau Strategy Goal 2, strengthening U.S. border security while facilitating
       legitimate travel.
   •   Risks | The Nepali political class’s penchant for balancing relations with its large
       neighbors India and the People’s Republic of China (PRC) renders security cooperation,
       including with the United States, prone to political interference. Additionally, Nepal’s
       limited defense budget and procurement process presents a challenge to increasing
       capacity and interoperability. Social exclusion results in social unrest and violence that
       will continue to be a challenge to Nepali authorities seeking to maintain security. The
       interference by malign foreign powers in the domestic affairs, including mis - and
       disinformation, may erode Nepal’s democracy and human rights gains and undermine
       security. Nepal’s justice sector faces challenges based on the frequent job rotations that
       undermine the effectiveness of key segments of its regulatory, law enforcement,
       prosecutors, and specialized agencies and units pointed at specific crime problems.
       Frequently rotated personnel do not gain the substantive expertise to perform critical
       roles for Nepal’s regulatory and justice sectors. Nepal also has had limited resources for
       training in these sectors and suffers from statutes that leave key actors unclear as to
       their roles, jurisdiction and extent of authority. Lack of clarity results in inertia to
       needed reforms. Failure to achieve objective 1.3 could lead to increased PRC influence
       in Nepal, border encroachment by its neighbors, and Nepal failing to play a constructive
       role in international fora, including the United Nations. This risk can be mitigated by
       effective implementation of the activities under this objective, particularly through


Approved: April 1, 2022
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                         FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                              Page 11 of 23


        strong interagency cooperation and consistent engagement with the NA, APF, Nepal
        Police and other security organizations in Nepal.


Mission Goal 2 | Support inclusive, equitable economic growth and a clean,
resilient energy future in Nepal.

Description | Mission Kathmandu aims to support Nepal in becoming a more connected and
reliable economic partner, with increased capacity to develop and maintain its physical, human,
and natural resources; to better engage in regional and international markets; and to uphold
free, fair, and reciprocal economic relationships. Our engagement with Nepal’s elected
officials, civil servants, private sector, civil society, and citizenry aims to support Nepal in
building a strong economic policy framework that enables an open and transparent
marketplace, supports innovation and job creation, builds effective economic institutions,
attracts foreign direct investment, and provides stability for business and investment. Through
our development programs and diplomatic engagement, we will strengthen Nepal’s efforts to
maintain and enhance its natural resources, combat climate change, and pursue a green,
inclusive, and resilient development pathway. We will provide support to build Nepal’s
capacity to participate in regional and international markets, including by leveraging relevant
USG agencies such as the DOC’s Commercial Law Development Program (CLDP) and/or the U.S.
Trade and Development Agency (USTDA), thereby enhancing regional connectivity and
opportunities for U.S. businesses. Our MCC Compact and other development programs will
support development and maintenance of quality physical capital, including electricity
infrastructure and roads and build capacity of national utility and the electricity regulatory
commission. Targeting the nearly two-thirds of Nepalis engaged in agriculture, Feed the Future
programs will promote inclusive private sector-driven growth in agriculture to increase
productivity and profitability, reduce Nepal’s high rate of rural poverty, and create greater
opportunities for labor to move off-farm. To support Nepal’s transition from over-reliance on
less productive sectors, we will also focus on high-growth sectors that demonstrate potential to
meet domestic market demand, expand trade, and generate income and employment. At the
same time, we will work to promote inclusive development and broad-based economic growth

Approved: April 1, 2022
                                         FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                             Page 12 of 23


through partnerships with government, civil society, and private sector to strengthen Nepal’s
health and education systems to deliver equitable, quality services to the population. Our
efforts to build environmental sustainability and resilience will promote stability within Nepal,
and throughout South Asia, by improving water management in ecologically sensitive areas,
enhancing regional power trade, reducing transnational crime associated with wildlife
trafficking, and building sustainable frameworks for climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Given its geostrategic location, our support will be vital to bolstering Nepal’s contribution to
regional connectivity and the country’s support for free, fair, and reciprocal economic practices
and relationships. A stronger Nepali economy will be one that will make Nepal a more reliable
economic partner for U.S. firms who want to invest in and export to this country.

Objective 2.1 | Nepal increases rules-based trade, competitiveness, and cross-border
cooperation, thus advancing inclusive and sustainable economic growth and reducing extreme
poverty.

   •   Justification | Development of Nepal’s economy remains a critical goal for the United
       States. A more robust economy provides increased income for Nepalis, builds a
       foundation for stability and prosperity, and creates greater opportunities for U.S.
       business and investment. Without sustainable growth under a competitive and
       transparent market-based economy, Nepal risks falling further behind the growth of
       regional neighbors and will remain vulnerable to predatory trade and investment
       practices. Advancing economic growth and trade buttressed by strong institutions will
       not only provide domestic benefits but also could reduce transnational migration and
       promote regional stability while denying malign actors opportunities to shape a
       different economic narrative or expanding external political influence through debt
       holdings.
   •   Linkages | Links to CDCS DO2: Broad-based and Inclusive Economic Growth Fostered.
       Links to SCA JRS BO 3.1: Strengthen transportation, commercial, and energy connectivity
       within the region by increasing cooperation, partnerships, and trade. Links to Indo-




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                              Page 13 of 23


       Pacific Strategy Pillar 3 as published by the White House in February 2022: Drive Indo-
       Pacific Prosperity.
   •   Risks | Malign actors (domestic or foreign) utilize underhanded methods to influence
       Nepal’s economic policy and environment towards uncompetitive, non-market-based
       arenas, including the use of misinformation campaigns to derail energy sector support
       and progress. The MCC Compact – only ratified on February 27, 2022, after years of
       delays caused by disinformation – was almost defeated through this strategy, providing
       a model for undermining other USG programs. Malign actors also leverage corrupt or
       ideologically friendly politicians/parties to bend or re-write the rules in favor of their
       own (state-owned) companies (resulting, for instance, in a proclivity for non-transparent
       G2G deals vs open, transparent, competitive bidding). These malign actors also exploit
       Nepal’s own laws to their advantage e.g., the public procurement law, based on lowest
       cost, being used by PRC companies to win public contracts thereby reducing fair, healthy
       competition, and dislodging/discouraging other foreign companies from participating in
       public projects in Nepal. Further rivalry and jostling among Nepal’s two large neighbors
       lead to further political instability, leading to policy uncertainty, delays, and thence
       economic disarray. Special interest groups and the business-politics nexus promote
       protectionist policies and foster corruption. Policymaking is hijacked to suit small,
       special interests, as opposed to the larger and long-term national interest, undermining
       a rules-based economy and inclusive, equitable growth. Failure to achieve objective 2.1
       could result in increased instability, reduced economic growth, and higher poverty rates.

Objective 2.2 | Nepal improves health and education outcomes to create a more inclusive
society and productive economy.

   •   Justification | Inclusive human capital development is a requirement for broad-based
       economic growth and democratic governance. A healthy, literate, and skilled
       population in concert with strong sector planning, budgeting, and execution will
       increase Nepal’s capacity to be a reliable economic partner. U.S. engagement and
       technical support will enhance federal, provincial, and municipal governments’ ability to


Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                             Page 14 of 23


       plan, budget and deliver health and education services. It will improve the ability of the
       health and education systems to reach the most marginalized populations, narrowing
       existing gaps in gender and social inequalities.
   •   Linkages | Links to CDCS DO3: Inclusive Health and Education Systems Strengthened
       and USAID’s Education Policy. Links to SCA JRS BO 3.3: Improve the enabling
       environment to expand economic growth and cooperation. Links to Indo-Pacific
       Strategy Pillar 3 as published by the White House in February 2022: Drive Indo-Pacific
       Prosperity.
   •   Risks | GON and U.S. partners are unable to embrace multisector approaches required
       to address complex emergencies such as COVID. Delayed Federal Education Act in
       Nepal, impacts Local Education Act in Nepal. Federal level efforts to retain power and
       resources rather than devolving them to sub-national governments (SNGs) negatively
       impact SNGs ability to fulfill their responsibilities in health and education. Inadequate
       allocation of HR at the sub-national level hampers effective implementation of
       programs. GON mechanisms for monitoring, evaluation and reporting are not fully
       developed, impacting the availability of timely data for decision making. Governance
       remains too weak to ensure adequate internal control mechanisms. Restrictions on civil
       society organizations limit their voice for government accountability. Federalism
       disrupts existing systems for service implementation at the local level, presenting risks
       to delivery of these public services. Enforcement/compliance of policies is lacking. All
       these risks potentially impact effectiveness and impact of U.S. assistance, create
       opportunities for fraud, waste, and abuse of US taxpayer dollars, and could erode hard-
       won gains in health and education. Mitigation efforts include dedicating U.S. resources
       to clarifying roles and responsibilities of different actors within the federal structure and
       identifying and addressing gaps in systems and capacity of individuals and institutions to
       fulfill their mandates, and effectively plan for, implement, monitor, and oversee health
       and education activities.




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                      FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                           Page 15 of 23


Objective 2.3 | Nepal addresses major climate and disaster risks, accelerates clean energy
development, and safeguards natural resources for environmentally sustainable and more
equitable economic growth.

   •   Justification | Nepal depends on its natural resources, including energy, water, land,
       and clean air for long-term growth. Yet the sustainability of these natural resources –
       and the vulnerable communities that depend on them for their livelihoods – are
       threatened by climate change, natural disasters, overuse, pollution, and infrastructure
       development that too often ignores environmental and social safeguards. The
       environmental richness of Nepal presents an opportunity to lift Nepalis out of poverty;
       at the same time, natural disasters repeatedly push the vulnerable back into poverty,
       undermine conservation efforts and constrain economic opportunity for all. Improving
       natural resources management and disaster risk management, addressing the drivers
       and impacts of climate change and sustainably developing Nepal’s extensive clean
       energy resources is crucial to Nepal’s long-term sustainable social and economic
       development, stability, and independence.
   •   Linkages | Links to CDCS DO 4: More Equitable and Improved Natural Resources and
       Disaster Risk Management. Links to SCA JRS BO 1.2: Advance approaches to mitigate
       and adapt to the climate crisis across sectors in collaboration with governments and
       partners. Links to Indo-Pacific Strategy Pillar 4 as published by the White House in
       February 2022: help build a more resilient Indo-Pacific.
   •   Risks | GON turf battles and conflicts among the three tiers of governments regarding
       jurisdiction and resource sharing undermine sounds natural resource management. The
       GON fails to provide necessary financial resources and other support to provincial and
       municipal governments for decentralized natural resource management planning and
       project implementation. Natural disasters, climate change and other shocks and stress
       overwhelm local and national coping capacity, leading to poverty backsliding and
       increased instability. Poorly managed urbanization and infrastructure development
       increase disaster risk. The GON fails to implement the MCC Compact, leading to critical
       transmission infrastructure not being built and undermining Nepal’s clean energy

Approved: April 1, 2022
                                      FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                            Page 16 of 23


       development and credibility as a destination for international credit and investment.
       Local and provincial governments are not adequately empowered, equipped, or funded
       to implement necessary local climate change mitigation and adaptation measures. The
       GON lacks capacity and political will to take needed action to live up to UNFCC
       commitments on emissions reductions, methane, and adaptation. Economic and
       pandemic pressures reduce local authorities’ capacity to prevent, detect and prosecute
       wildlife trafficking. All these risks threaten key USG foreign policy objectives in Nepal, as
       climate change and disaster risks threaten Nepal’s stability, prosperity, ability to engage
       in trade with the United States, and could influence regional geopolitics in ways
       detrimental to USG interests. These risks can be mitigated by effective implementation
       of the activities under this objective.


Mission Goal 3 | Help Nepal become more self-reliant, independent, and resilient
as it confronts global challenges.

Description | The U.S. Mission will use all instruments of diplomacy and development to assist
Nepal in becoming a more self-reliant partner, advancing American influence, and enabling
both nations to achieve our shared goals. The USG is a longstanding partner and the largest
bilateral donor in Nepal and will leverage its resources and relationships to help transition the
country into a more capable and independent ally. The United States will bolster Nepal’s
capacity to engage more effectively across a range of multilateral venues on priority policy,
rights-focused, security, and economic issues. By enabling Nepal to play a more constructive
role in regional political and economic affairs, we are empowering the country to transition into
a partner and stable middle-income country that can better support an accountable and rules-
based order to advance our shared economic prosperity, social development, and security
goals. Providing channels for smart and coherent investment from the private sector and the
international donor community is imperative in positioning Nepal to become a more
prosperous, self-reliant, and independent country. The USG will work closely with civil society,
the public, the private sector, political leaders, and government officials to mobilize broad-
based support and demand for transparent and accountable governance across Nepal’s public

Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                            Page 17 of 23


and private sector institutions. Development programs and diplomatic efforts will provide the
incentives and expertise the GON requires to drive institutional change, wisely leverage
commitments from donors and development partners, and more effectively guide Nepal’s
development. These incentives include an increasing amount of development assistance going
directly to the GON in support of their development priorities. Natural disasters are a constant
threat to Nepal’s stability and prosperity that can instantly nullify development gains. For this
reason, U.S. humanitarian assistance and investment in disaster risk management and
resilience – strengthening Nepal’s ability to mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from
shocks – assists Nepal in becoming more self-reliant, protects the development achievements
realized through decades of U.S. taxpayer support, and ultimately reduces the cost of future
humanitarian interventions, strengthening the sustainability of all diplomacy and development
investments.

Objective 3.1 | Nepal becomes a more active, engaged, and autonomous partner in
international fora, adheres to international agreements and commitments, and promotes
regional connectivity.

   •   Justification | The United States values reliable partners committed to substantive
       cooperation to enhance regional stability and prosperity in the South and Central Asia
       (SCA) region. Nepal is an important U.S. partner located at the region’s nexus between
       two global giants, India, and China. Greater participation and leadership by Nepal in
       international fora, including, among others, regional organizations like the South Asian
       Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-
       Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), will expand its influence while
       enhancing cooperation and stability in the region. Nepal’s commitment and adherence
       to international treaties and agreements (including their signed MCC agreement) will
       help advance U.S. priorities around fundamental freedoms, accountability, and
       protection of citizens that foster the governance, security, and economic goals above.
       Increased regional and sub-regional cooperation and adherence to international
       commitments will also help reduce Nepal’s dependence on impositions by neighboring


Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                             Page 18 of 23


       countries that may not benefit Nepal’s own interests or could degrade its sovereignty.
       Stable regional politics and a more conducive business environment across the region
       will assist in institutionalizing opportunities for greater intra-regional and U.S. trade and
       investment.
   •   Linkages | Links to SCA JRS BO 4.1: Strengthen the capacity and political will of South
       and Central Asian allies and partners to independently manage their own security
       challenges and support a rules-based regional and international order. Links to Indo-
       Pacific Strategy Pillar 1 as published by the White House in February 2022: Advance a
       Free and Open Indo-Pacific.
   •   Risks | The shift to federalism causes challenges to direct limited resources where they
       are needed, rectify their limited government capacity, clarify new expenditure
       responsibilities, and resolve disputes over revenue sharing and taxation authority.
       Without achievement of this ICS objective, Nepal’s progress towards federalism could
       be lost. Conservation of Nepal’s natural resources is not prioritized, and rapid
       infrastructure development threatens protected areas, which will accelerate global
       climate change if the U.S. does not continue to press Nepal to fulfill its international
       climate change commitments. with U.S. support. To mitigate these risks, the United
       States must also continue to push the GON to take positive steps to encourage citizen
       participation and collaboration regardless of caste, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation,
       and economic status, otherwise there is the possibility of democratic backsliding if these
       deep-rooted social and historical inequities are not adequately addressed.

Objective 3.2 | Nepali public opinion is shaped through robust government, civil society, and
private sector engagement that is free from repression, censorship, and resilient against state-
sponsored disinformation and coercion.

   •   Justification | American information, expertise, and influence can help foster conditions
       for continued peace and increased prosperity in Nepal. The United States is a reliable
       partner to those who share our aspirations for freedom and prosperity. U.S.
       engagement will mitigate Nepal’s vulnerability to state-sponsored coercion that runs


Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                      FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                            Page 19 of 23


       counter to democratic and free-market principles. By seeking partnerships with
       influential leaders and groups, key populations, government, and civil society, we can
       influence opinion among Nepalis for greater action to become a more sovereign,
       prosperous society, based on shared values. Similarly, effective engagement with the
       Government of Nepal can provide the ability and direction needed to help the country
       better manage its development partnerships and decrease its dependence on foreign
       assistance. If Nepal does not seize opportunities to support a vibrant private sector that
       is active both domestically and within the region, promote a free and balanced media,
       and build a public sector that utilizes evidence-based practices to improve its
       management of resources to deliver to its citizens, Nepal risks deeper economic
       dependence on its neighbors, the erosion of a free press, civil society, and public
       support for the system of governance that will ultimately undermine the country’s
       significant democratic gains. USAID has developed a new Communications Strategy
       Framework to support its new CDCS implementation and ensure that it is actively
       contributing to supporting public and GON opinion in the achievement of Embassy
       Kathmandu’s ICS objectives.
   •   Linkages | Links to SCA JRS BO 2.2: Support the development, capacity, and resilience of
       civil society and an independent media as safeguards of democracy. Links to Indo-
       Pacific Strategy Pillar 1 as published by the White House in February 2022: Advance a
       Free and Open Indo-Pacific. Links to USAID’s Strategic Communications Framework,
       which supports the implementation of its CDCS.)
   •   Risks | If this objective is not achieved, rampant disinformation and misinformation on
       social media will go unchecked and will pose a significant challenge for the GON as it
       navigates its development agenda and public policy reform as a new democracy. Access
       to credible, factual information is challenged by poverty and poor literacy rates for
       Nepalis living outside of Kathmandu and other urban centers, and malign actors will
       continue to take advantage of these weaknesses without U.S. opposition through this
       objective. Sitting between regional powers India and China, Nepal increasingly sees the
       United States as yet another powerful actor with geopolitical ambitions in Nepal, thanks


Approved: April 1, 2022
                                      FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                           FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                         Page 20 of 23


        in part to state-sponsored disinformation efforts. The constant power struggle between
        Nepali political parties has made Nepal’s vibrant free press a regular target for proposed
        laws to restrict press activity.

Objective 3.3 | Nepal improves coordination of assistance and services to Nepalis and U.S.
citizens in Nepal, at all times, and particularly during crises.

    •   Justification | Nepal remains among the most vulnerable countries in the world to
        natural disasters, including earthquakes, floods, landslides, and fires, which are a
        constant threat to its stability and development. In the last decade (2011-2021),
        disasters killed more than 13,500 Nepalis (2015 Nepal Earthquake Post Disaster Needs
        Assessment). Every year, thousands of people are affected by disasters such as
        earthquakes, landslides, and floods, with landslides and floods becoming worse with
        climate change. Disasters are estimated to reduce GDP growth in Nepal by an average
        of 1.5 percent per year, backsliding thousands of households into poverty, with socially
        disadvantaged populations experiencing a disproportionate degree of economic impact
        [UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (2019) Disaster Risk Reduction in Nepal: Status
        Report 2019]. The 2015 earthquakes alone caused over $7 billion in losses and
        damages, killed 9,000 people, and saw 800,000 people backslide into poverty [2015
        Nepal Earthquake Post Disaster Needs Assessment and Nepal: Open Data to Improve
        Disaster Relief (2017)]. These recurrent shocks underscore the risk of erosion of
        decades of hard-won development gains and exacerbating the inequality among Nepal’s
        diverse population comprising over 88 castes and ethnicities. The emergence of COVID-
        19 is the latest in the pattern of shocks and disasters in Nepal. As the recovery from the
        2015 earthquakes nears completion, COVID-19 now threatens to inflict deep and lasting
        economic damage and engulf the country in political instability, while also jeopardizing
        the most marginalized populations’ resilience to shocks. The U.S. Mission remains a
        stalwart partner to Nepal to be better prepared to face recurring natural disasters,
        including institutionalizing systems that can mitigate economic and human loss.




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                           FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                              Page 21 of 23


       Improved disaster management capabilities also help protect the security and safety of
       American citizens in Nepal, while serving to improve regional connectivity.
   •   Linkages | Objective 3.3 links to the USAID/Nepal CDCS 2021-2025 and its Development
       Objective 4 (DO 4): More Equitable & Improved Nature Resources & Disaster Risk
       Management. The framework for the sub-objectives of this goal reflects the
       intermediate results of DO 4, providing uniformity of mission. Objective 3.3 also links to
       the Consular Affairs Functional Bureau Strategy Goal 1, to protect the lives and serve the
       interests of U.S. citizens overseas.
   •   Risks | The GON is continuing to implement federalism, and without U.S. support to
       help decentralize disaster risk response, the impact of future shocks will only increase in
       severity. Political infighting among the three tiers of government regarding jurisdiction
       and resource sharing could lead to the government failing to adequately devolve
       authority and resources, limiting subnational entities’ ability to fulfill their mandates.
       Moreover, COVID-19 continues to strain the democratic systems and institutions that
       help deliver critical services to Nepalis, and without the resilience activities in this
       objective, Nepal’s risk to future pandemics will remain high. Without sustained U.S.
       disaster risk reduction programming, devastating natural disasters, shocks, and
       economic stresses will lead to poverty back-sliding and may overwhelm Nepal’s nascent
       systems. Poorly managed urbanization and infrastructure development increase
       disaster risk. The pivot away from a reactive GON security forces-led disaster response
       strategy towards a civilian-led disaster risk reduction-focused strategy is stymied by
       poor capacity of the nascent Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority, which
       makes continued U.S. support absolutely necessary.




Approved: April 1, 2022
                                        FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                          FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                          Page 22 of 23


   4. Management Objectives

Management Objective 1 | Modernize information technology resources and
tools to increase collaboration, improve service delivery, and enhance internal
controls.

   •   Justification | The Mission understands the importance of state-of-the-art information
       technology as a foundation to day-to-day operations. These tools enable the Mission to
       efficiently and effectively perform essential tasks to achieve ICS goals. The Mission aims
       to modernize technology to capitalize on advancements in remote and virtual tools that
       provide more flexible and expansive information sharing. Reengineered Chancery
       spaces designed for collaboration will include the implementation of modern hardware
       and outfitted with raw internet access and robust power systems. The effort will push
       the boundaries of a fully engaged workforce by minimizing limitations imposed by staff
       location and agency affiliation.
   •   Linkages | Links to SCA JRS BMO: Align personnel and manage resources to implement
       strategic priorities and to ensure effectiveness and accountability.
   •   Risks | Post’s digital security posture must continue to align with Departmental
       cybersecurity policy and guidance. Supply chain and shipping delays imposed by the
       COVID-19 pandemic and felt by service providers globally could delay availability of
       equipment and installation. Information technology advances may be hindered by the
       reliability of internet performance in the region. To mitigate this risk, the full potential
       of this service delivery can only be realized with customer training and an embrace of
       the new tools.


Management Objective 2 | Operational effectiveness and efficiency enhanced
through physical workspace modernization, innovative design concepts, and
increased accessibility.


Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE                             Page 23 of 23


   •   Justification | Embassy Kathmandu has a long history of active collaboration across and
       within sections and agencies. Innovative design concepts in the physical layout of
       workspaces will foster communication and coordination. The Mission envisions
       “collaboration hubs” that will be the center of dynamic workspaces to enhance
       creativity, brainstorming, and knowledge management.
   •   Linkages | Links to SCA JRS BMO: Align personnel and manage resources to implement
       strategic priorities and to ensure effectiveness and accountability.
   •   Risks | Funding for a large-scale overhaul is required from each Agency. Supply chain
       and shipping delays imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic could delay availability of
       equipment and installation. To mitigate this risk, management must regularly monitor
       progress towards achieving indicators and milestones of the various sub-objectives.


Management Objective 3 | Mission performance and effectiveness enhanced
through a diverse, equitable, inclusive, and accessible workplace.

   •   Justification | A growing body of evidence demonstrates that diverse, equitable,
       inclusive, and accessible workplaces produce higher-performing organizations. Embassy
       Kathmandu is at its best when it draws upon all parts of society, when diverse
       perspectives are heard and valued, and when all persons receive fair treatment under
       the law. The Mission is implementing a comprehensive Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and
       Accessibility (DEIA) strategic framework to institutionalize practices that foster a
       diverse, inclusive, and fair working environment that combats prejudice and empowers
       Mission Nepal community members, including Nepali and Third Country National staff,
       American Officers, and contractors.
   •   Linkages | Links to SCA JRS BMO: Align personnel and manage resources to implement
       strategic priorities and to ensure effectiveness and accountability.
   •   Risks | Translating DEIA concepts into actionable, realistic work plans may be difficult.
       Assessing the needs of the Mission will require quality data and sound analysis. There is
       a risk of continuity as staff transitions occur. To mitigate this risk, ensuring consistent
       direction and momentum will be key.

Approved: April 1, 2022
                                       FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
