                  UNCLASSIFIED (U)




                                    NEPAL




                                              PHOTO CREDIT: THOMAS CHRISTOFOLETTI




COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT
COOPERATION STRATEGY
       (CDCS)

DECEMBER 2020 - DECEMBER 2025


                Approved for Public Release
 CONTENTS
 ACRONYMS                                                                         2
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                3
 COUNTRY CONTEXT                                                                  5
   IMPACT OF COVID-19                                                             7
   ALIGNMENT WITH GON PRIORITIES                                                  7
   THE JOURNEY TO SELF RELIANCE (J2SR)                                            7
 STRATEGIC APPROACH                                                             10
   SUPPORTING THE TRANSITION TO FEDERALISM                                       10
   INCLUSION AS A PRIMARY TARGET OF INTERVENTION                                 11
   INTEGRATING RESILIENCE INTO OUTCOMES                                          12
 RESULTS FRAMEWORK                                                              13
   GOAL STATEMENT AND NARRATIVE                                                  13
   DO 1: MORE EFFECTIVE, PARTICIPATORY, AND EQUITABLE DEMOCRATIC ECOSYSTEM       13
   DO 2: BROAD-BASED AND INCLUSIVE ECONOMIC GROWTH FOSTERED                      16
   DO 3: INCLUSIVE HEALTH & EDUCATION SYSTEMS STRENGTHENED                       20
   DO 4: MORE EQUITABLE & IMPROVED NATURAL RESOURCES & DISASTER RISK
   MANAGEMENT                                                                    24
 MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING                                           28
 ANNEXES                                                                        29
   A. JOURNEY TO SELF-RELIANCE COUNTRY ROADMAP                                   30
   B. ENDNOTES                                                                   32




USAID.GOV                                                         USAID NEPAL CDCS | 1
 ACRONYMS
 ADB             Asian Development Bank
 CDCS            Country Development Cooperation Strategy
 CEFM            Child and Early Forced Marriage
 COVID-19        Novel coronavirus SARS-CoV2
 CSO             Civil Society Organization
 DO              Development Objective
 DIS             Development Information Solution
 DfID            United Kingdom Department for International Development
 DRM             Disaster Risk Management
 EU              European Union
 FSR             Financing Self Reliance
 G2G             Government to Government
 GBV             Gender Based Violence
 GDP             Gross Domestic Product
 GESI            Gender Equality and Social Inclusion
 GIS             Geographic Information System
 GON             Government of Nepal
 GPE             Global Partnership for Education
 GTZ             Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (German Technical Cooperation)
 ICT             Information Communications Technology
 IMF             International Monetary Fund
 INGO            International Non-Governmental Organization
 IR              Intermediate Result
 J2SR            Journey to Self Reliance
 JICA            Japan International Cooperation Agency
 NDRRMA          National Disaster Risk Reduction Management Authority
 NGO             Non-Governmental Organization
 NPI             New Partner Initiative
 NUP             New and Underutilized Partners
 PFM             Public Financial Management
 PMP             Performance Management Plan
 PSE             Private Sector Engagement
 RDR             Redefining the Development Relationship
 TIP             Trafficking in Persons
 UN              United Nations
 UNDP            United Nations Development Programme
 UNICEF          United Nation Children’s Fund
 WASH            Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
 WHO             World Health Organization
 WYM             Women, Youth, and Marginalized




2 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                       USAID.GOV
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 Nepal faces enormous and complicated development challenges, including social exclusion, inadequate
 basic service delivery, insufficient economic opportunity and sources of growth, relatively new and
 largely untested decentralized processes and institutions, incomplete reconstruction from the 2015
 earthquakes, and vast natural resources and biodiversity that require protection. The COVID-19
 pandemic has made existing development challenges even more pronounced and dire. It has widened the
 gap between those who have access to resources and power, and those who do not; it has decreased
 economic activity and opportunity; it has forced up to 1 million Nepali migrant workers home from over
 a dozen countries; it has undermined key sectors of the economy that Nepal depends on for survival;
 and it has threatened to erase hard earned gains in health, education, and public service delivery.

 The next five years are crucial for Nepal, not just to recover from COVID-19 and continue its previous
 development trajectory, but also to make the gains needed to attain its own goal of reaching middle
 income country status by 2030. To achieve this progress, Nepal will need to tap deeper into its own
 productive resources, implement policies that attract investment, and more aggressively engage the
 private sector in higher growth and more productive economic sectors, all the while building
 connectivity within the region. It also needs to ensure that its federal experiment is successful by giving
 voice, power, and authority to all of its diverse population. This will provide Nepal with a strong
 foundation for long-term inclusive, equitable, and sustainable economic growth and social development.

 Built on this context, USAID’s goal for the 2020-2025 CDCS is “A more self-reliant, prosperous, and
 inclusive Nepal that delivers improved democratic governance and health and education outcomes.”
 Over the strategy period, USAID will make significant investments to increase self-reliance, prosperity,
 and inclusiveness that will advance Nepal’s development trajectory and allow Nepal to make impressive
 development gains that benefit all citizens. The first component of the goal, comprising the principles of
 self-reliance, prosperity, and inclusion cut across all aspects of the CDCS; they represent core elements
 crucial for Nepal’s development and are key to how the Mission will adapt its approach to build the
 capacity and institutions necessary to advance the Journey to Self-Reliance (J2SR) in Nepal.

 The second component of the goal focuses on advancing democracy and human capacity development,
 each of which are intertwined and are dependent on how successful Nepal is in establishing and
 implementing federalism. For example, the provision of critical public services - namely, health and
 education - is a measure of the success of federalism and its implementation, and is inherently linked to
 citizen capacity. COVID-19 further complicates the situation, disproportionately affecting both health
 and education outcomes, reducing access and quality - especially for the most marginalized -
 exacerbating existing inequality and vulnerability. Because Nepal has made federalism a fundamental
 component to the success of its democracy, it features prominently throughout the CDCS. Federalism is
 also one of the essential mechanisms for increasing self-reliance, inclusiveness, prosperity, democratic
 governance, and human capacity development over the next five years.

 To support Nepal’s development vision, USAID has woven three strategic approaches throughout the
 CDCS: Supporting the transition to federalism; Inclusion as a primary target of intervention; and,
 Integrating resilience into outcomes.

 Building off of the J2SR Country Roadmap, evidence, and experience, USAID’s CDCS constructs a
 results framework (see diagram below) that establishes meaningful, achievable, and instrumental results
 to further Nepal on its J2SR. In support of the goal, USAID will implement the CDCS through four
 Development Objectives (DOs): DO 1 More Effective, Participatory, and Equitable Democratic
 Ecosystem; DO 2 Broad-Based and Inclusive Economic Growth Fostered; DO 3 Inclusive Health and
 Education Systems Strengthened; DO 4 More Equitable and Improved Natural Resources and Disaster
 Risk Management.



USAID.GOV                                                                                  USAID NEPAL CDCS | 3
 During the course of this CDCS, the Mission will make several strategic transitions and engage in new
 areas of collaboration with the Government of Nepal (GON) towards advancement of the J2SR. USAID
 will strategically shift from post-earthquake recovery to climate and disaster risk mitigation, and from
 health and education service delivery to systems strengthening. As new areas, USAID will support Nepal
 in strengthening broad-based economic growth in partnership with the private sector, in addition to
 continued engagement on agriculture; and integrate rule of law programs as an additional measure to
 consolidate democracy and strengthen the entire federal governance ecosystem. To implement these
 transitions, USAID assistance will more explicitly focus on sustainability and self-reliance issues related
 to financing self-reliance (FSR), private sector engagement (PSE), and building upon or redefining our
 development relationship (RDR) with GON counterparts. In regular consultation with all levels of
 government, donors, and civil society, the Mission will also pursue opportunities for USAID to adopt
 more locally-owned and -led development models; strengthen the host-country government’s ability - at
 the central and local levels - to continue to take the lead in addressing, managing and funding their own
 development challenges; and support partnerships and approaches that expand access to finance,
 mobilize private capital, and improve access to markets.


                                 USAID/NEPAL CDCS 2020-2025
                                RESULTS FRAMEWORK DIAGRAM




4 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                 USAID.GOV
 COUNTRY CONTEXT
 Nepal is a relatively young democracy. In 2006, the country ended
 a decade long civil war. In 2017, two years after the adoption of the
 new constitution, Nepal began to devolve authority to local
 governments, as mandated in the constitution, to seven provinces
 and 753 new local governments in a process called federalism.
 While the central, provincial and local governments are meant to
 have harmonized policies and processes, several challenges -
 including, the limited capacity among sub-national governments, the
 distribution and allocation of resources, ethnic and linguistic
 heterogeneity, tax harmonization, intergovernmental relations, and
 most importantly lack of consensus on the approach and objectives
 of federalism - have delayed the devolution and implementation of
 authorities. Federalism promises to bring the government closer to
 its constituents and to improve equity in democracy and public
 services; however, it is a monumental undertaking involving central,
 provincial, and local government institutions that are understaffed
 and insufficiently prepared. Federalism in Nepal is not a fait
 accompli; potential challenges include poor service delivery, lack of
 will among those who prefer the centralized structure, corruption,
 lack of social inclusion and accountability, and/or a human-made or
 natural shock that destabilizes Nepal and its political and
 governance structures. The COVID-19 pandemic is perhaps the
 first real crisis and test for federalism in Nepal, requiring increased
 support from both the GON and development partners to local                 Map of Nepal
 governments to ensure the governance system’s effectiveness.              Source: CIA Factbook

 Buoyed by years of donor-driven reconstruction and earthquake
 recovery efforts, Nepal’s economy is not performing adequately
 and needs systemic shifts to create job and investment
 opportunities and alleviate poverty. 1 The economy lacks diversity,
 relying predominantly on subsistence agriculture, which currently
 makes up 30 percent of GDP, employs about two-thirds of the
 economically active population, and is challenged by low
 productivity. Agricultural development alone will not be sufficient
 to drive Nepal into middle income status. The business
 environment remains inadequate to drive broad based and inclusive
 growth in Nepal, as evidenced by the low investment rates (Private
 Fixed Capital Formation-to-GDP of 17.41% for Nepal compared to
 33.16% average for selected neighbors in the South Asia region;
 FDI-to-GDP in 2018 of 0.55% for Nepal compared to 1.48% region
 average 2). Despite reductions in nationwide levels, poverty remains
 disturbingly high (up to three times the national average of 7.8%),
 especially in remote geographic areas and among marginalized
 groups including Dalits (Hill Dalits at 14% and Madhesi Dalits at
 23.9%), Madhesi Other Caste (11.1%), and Muslims (12.7%). 3 Nepal
 will need to remove these constraints to inclusive, broad-based
 growth and catalyze increased trade and investment to build a
 more diversified and vibrant economy, and to sustainably reduce
 poverty.




USAID.GOV                                                                    USAID NEPAL CDCS | 5
 Nepal continues to grapple with addressing deep-rooted historical discrimination based on gender,
 ethnicity, religion, and caste that hinders development progress. Gender-based violence (GBV) is
 experienced by 22 percent of women aged 15- 49 and gender discrimination remains prevalent,
 particularly for the Muslims, Dalits and Madhesi Other Castes. 4 The COVID-19 pandemic has
 exacerbated GBV and hampered efforts to curtail child, early and forced marriage (CEFM). Nepal has
 high rates of CEFM: 44.1% of girls marry before their 18th birthday, even though the legal age for
 marriage is 20 years of age, and is most prevalent among Madhesi Dalit (73.5%), Madhesi Other Castes
 (69.5 %), and Muslims (60%). 5 Women who marry early are at increased risk of domestic violence and of
 being impoverished throughout their lives. 6

 Public health and education efforts in Nepal have made tremendous strides in reducing childhood
 mortality and morbidity 7 and achieving universal access to basic education; 8 however, enormous unmet
 needs remain including: inadequate access to family planning; malnutrition; high rates of maternal and
 neonatal mortality, morbidity and mortality, caused by infectious diseases and poor water, sanitation and
 hygiene; disability; and education quality. 9 There also are disparities in health 10 and education 11
 outcomes by caste, economic status, and gender. In addition, as responsibility for service implementation
 moves to the local level under federalism, existing systems have become disrupted, presenting risks to
 delivery of essential public services and threatening hard-won gains in health and education; COVID-19
 only amplifies these risks.

 With altitudes ranging from 60 meters to the highest elevation in the world of 8,848 meters above sea
 level, Nepal’s location at the junction of two major biogeographic regions - the Indo-Malayan and the
 Palearctic - creates a unique environment with abundant natural resources and globally significant
 biodiversity. Nepal occupies only about 0.1 percent of the earth, yet it is the home to 118 distinct
 ecosystems with 3.2 percent of the world’s flora and 1.1 percent of its fauna, 12 creating a comparative
 advantage with tremendous potential for sustainable, natural resource-based economic development. It
 is also endowed with extraordinary water resources for a country its size, including approximately 6,000
 rivers. 13 Those rivers have the ability to produce 40,000 commercially viable gigawatts of energy from
 hydropower alone - over 30 times more than Nepal’s current energy usage - with significant implications
 for investment, growth and regional energy market advances. 14

 Nepal remains among the most vulnerable countries in the world to natural disasters. Every year, tens
 of thousands of people are affected by disasters such as earthquakes, landslides, and floods, with
 landslides and floods becoming worse with climate change. Studies estimate that disasters reduce GDP
 growth in Nepal by an average of 1.5% per year, regularly pushing thousands of households back into
 poverty. 15 Approximately 700,000 Nepalis fell below the poverty line as a result of the 2015
 earthquakes. These recurrent shocks hinder Nepal’s ability to progress along its path to self-reliance and
 achieve its goal of becoming a middle-income country by 2030. The emergence of COVID-19 is the
 latest in the pattern of shocks and disasters in Nepal. Despite five years of rebuilding Nepal from the
 2015 earthquakes, COVID-19 threatens to inflict deep and lasting economic damage to the country,
 and may exacerbate inequality throughout Nepal, especially in-service delivery, while also jeopardizing
 the most vulnerable populations’ resilience to shocks. Already, the widespread damage wrought by
 COVID-19 has emphasized the importance of strengthening systems and boosting resilience to reduce
 the severity of these recurring shocks and foster self-reliance.

 The U.S. Government (USG), starting through USAID’s precursor and continuing with USAID, is Nepal’s
 oldest development partner, working together for over 72 years. While the USG is the 3rd largest
 donor in Nepal (after the World Bank and Asian Development Bank (ADB)), it is the largest bilateral
 donor and the largest donor overall in terms of grant funding. In cooperation with other donors through
 the International Development Partners Group, USAID has provided its expertise and impact in several
 sectors, including democracy and governance, health, education, natural resource management,



6 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                USAID.GOV
 agricultural development, and reconstruction and disaster risk reduction. To leverage donor efforts,
 USAID will continue to collaborate with the World Bank, DFID, and EU, among others to advance the
 transition to federalism. Over the course of this strategy, USAID will build on and expand coordination
 with donors to solicit feedback on new designs and continue to find opportunities for partnerships on
 shared goals.
 IMPACT OF COVID-19
 The spread of COVID-19 in Nepal was delayed by a preventive 100-day nation-wide lockdown;
 however, after the lockdown was relaxed, cases rose significantly. The provision of most basic public
 services, including education and health, have slowed or ceased. Many public schools are unable to
 continue in-person teaching and are unable to transition to virtual classrooms. Access and use of health
 services have decreased due to public fears, health commodity shortages, and additional health needs,
 burdening an already strained and under-resourced health system. With hundreds of thousands of
 Nepali migrant workers returning to Nepal, and faced with a severe and complex public health crisis, the
 COVID-19 response immediately challenged GON institutions, officials, and elected representatives to
 provide the necessary response, policies, and services to control the virus. Although Nepal’s official
 unemployment is rather low, the return of migrant workers will strain public services and create
 challenging community dynamics related to migrant reintegration, employment, and overall social
 cohesion. The financial hardships for households and businesses, in addition to the lack of capacity of
 local governments to implement basic services has challenged many citizens. Youth, women, and
 marginalized populations continue to bear a disproportionate burden of COVID-19 impacts, yet are still
 not able to substantially participate in decision-making on response and relief measures.
 ALIGNMENT WITH GON PRIORITIES
 USAID’s new CDCS is aligned with Nepal’s recent 15th Periodic Plan (2019-2024), the strategy that
 defines the GON’s development policy and direction, including: fully implementing the constitution
 (including inclusiveness and development for marginalized communities); improving economic growth
 (specifically energy, tourism, and agriculture); reducing absolute poverty; and coordinating among all
 tiers of government to balance development across the provincial and local levels. 16 The GON has
 expressed its preference for budget support, which will be an important area of consideration in
 USAID’s new strategy period. The devolution of authority to the provincial and local levels presents
 new opportunities to support the GON with government to government (G2G) assistance, contributing
 to the Agency’s goal of building upon and redefining its development relationship with host countries
 (RDR).
 THE JOURNEY TO SELF RELIANCE (J2SR)
 Under this CDCS, USAID has strategically prioritized the sub-dimensions and metrics from the J2SR
 Country Roadmap for investment that are most critical for Nepal’s development objectives. 17 The
 selection of these sub-dimensions and metrics reflect a mix of strengths and challenges from the
 Country Roadmap that together define the strategic areas that are most important for building capacity
 and commitment to further Nepal’s journey to self-reliance.

 COMMITMENT
 Open and Accountable Governance: The Liberal Democracy and Open Government metrics, while
 currently rated high, are threatened by the challenges associated with the shift to federalism and do not
 capture the issues associated with operationalizing the constitution. Nepal will need to prevent
 democratic backsliding and take positive steps to advance open government and governance that
 encourages citizen participation and collaboration, regardless of caste, ethnicity, gender, sexual
 orientation, and economic status.




USAID.GOV                                                                                USAID NEPAL CDCS | 7
                             Inclusive Development: While the Inclusive Development J2SR
                             Country Roadmap sub-dimension appears high for Nepal, it is
                             inflated largely due to gains made by women from elite Newari and
                             Brahmin-Chetri populations, not the population at large. 18 Also,
                             gender gaps vary greatly among different castes/ethnicities, classes,
                             and regions. Disparities between marginalized and non-marginalized
                             groups remain high, especially for the marginalized Hill and Madhesi
                             Dalits, Madhesi Other Castes, Tarai Janajatis, and Muslims- who
                             comprise nearly 40 percent of the population. 19 Women have
                             gained a greater foothold in the labor market; however, this is
                             likely due to the mass migration of male workers, which often
                             leaves women with the additional burden of household labor.
                             Inequity is often cited as one of the driving factors for conflict in
                             Nepal, including the Maoist insurgency, and not adequately
                             addressing deep-rooted social and historical inequities presents the
                             risk that conflict will resurface.

                             Economic Policy: While the Economic Policy sub-dimension is
                             considered average according to the J2SR Country Roadmap, the
                             Business Environment metric within this sub-dimension remains
                             inadequate in Nepal to build the vibrant private sector needed to
                             lift a large part of the population out of poverty and propel the
                             country into middle income status. The Trade Freedom metric is
                             well below the J2SR Country Roadmap average, but is
                             commensurate with the region. The Environmental Policy metric
                             scored close to average; however, given Nepal’s incredible
                             biodiversity and natural resources - landscapes, forests, wildlife, and
                             water resources - this area remains a priority as it is critical to
 Nepal’s Journey to Self-    providing the underlying natural capital that drives food security,
 Reliance Country Roadmap    energy development, resilience to climate risks, and sustainable
 Commitment Sub-Dimensions   economic growth - such as supporting the tourism sector that was
 and Metrics                 robust before COVID-19. Given Nepal’s few economic
                             comparative advantages, coupled with the advent of
                             decentralization and rapid infrastructure development that pose
                             threats to protected areas, conservation of Nepal’s natural
                             resources is paramount for reducing disaster risks and furthering
                             the J2SR.

                             CAPACITY
                             The Government Effectiveness and Tax System Effectiveness
                             metrics are rated below average due to challenges in collecting,
                             managing, and effectively expending public finances. The federal
                             transition also poses immense challenges to the ability of sub-
                             national governments to direct the limited resources where they
                             are needed, rectify their limited government capacity, clarify new
                             expenditure responsibilities, and resolve disputes over revenue
                             sharing and taxation authority. 20

                             Civil Society Capacity: Nepal’s high civil society metric score likely
                             reflects the prolific number of organizations registered, rather than




8 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                        USAID.GOV
 actual capacity. Civil society plays an important role in the
 consolidation of democratic institutions in order to deliver on the
 promise of democracy in Nepal.

 Citizen Capacity: Nepal’s poverty rate metric is significantly worse
 than its peers on the roadmap. This is especially true for remote
 geographic areas and among marginalized groups that have higher
 poverty rates than the national average. The GON’s Sustainable
 Development Goals 2016 - 2030 report notes that there are large
 disparities in regional, caste/ethnicity, gender, and geographical
 outcomes. 21 The Multidimensional Poverty Index, using a more
 encompassing poverty definition, states that 34 percent of Nepal’s
 population were in multidimensional poverty in 2016 (the last
 available year for data). 22 The Poverty Probability Index is highest
 for Madhesi Dalits (23.9%), Hill Dalits (14%), and Muslims
 (12.7%). 23 Routine shocks regularly cause Nepalis who have made
 economic progress to fall back into poverty. Also, increasing
 environmental risks, caused by urban expansion and poor-quality
 infrastructure, disproportionately impact the poor, such as
 increased exposure to pollution and risk for water borne disease
 transmission. Health indicators have improved dramatically in
 Nepal over the past twenty years. For example, under-five and
 neonatal mortality rates have declined by nearly 70 percent and 60
 percent respectively. However, there are still areas where progress
 lags behind (maternal mortality, malnutrition), and there are
 disparities in health outcomes by caste, wealth, and gender.
 Additionally, federalism and COVID-19 has disrupted every major
 health system (human resources, health information systems for
 evidence-based decision making, procurement and distribution of
 quality medicines, and others), and Nepal’s remarkable health gains
 are at risk of backsliding. On the surface, significant gains have been       Nepal’s Journey to Self-
 made in education - Nepal has achieved universal access to                Reliance Country Roadmap
 education and more Nepalis than ever are accessing higher                        Capacity Sub-Dimensions
 education. Unfortunately, when measuring learning-adjusted years                             and Metrics
 of schooling, a Nepali student only receives about 6.9 years of
 schooling despite attending school for 11.7 years 24 - a clear sign of
 quality issues that will only be exacerbated when the
 responsibilities for primary and secondary education devolve to
 unprepared local authorities and the full impact of COVID-19 is
 realized.

 Capacity of the Economy: One of the reasons, identified in the
 Economic Policy sub-dimension, for Nepal’s low GDP per capita
 ranking in the Country Roadmap is the constant recurrence of
 natural disasters that divert productive resources - human and
 capital - from investment into the economy. It is estimated that due
 to Nepal’s lack of disaster preparedness for floods alone, over1.5
 percent in GDP is lost annually. This does not even account for the
 recurrent, generational catastrophes, like the 2015 earthquakes,
 that drove over 700,000 people into poverty, incurred a
 reconstruction cost of over $8 billion, severely damaged or



USAID.GOV                                                                               USAID NEPAL CDCS | 9
 destroyed over 800,000 homes, 8,200 schools, 1,200 health facilities, and killed an estimated 9,000
 people. Without addressing these significant and persistent climactic and environmental shocks, 25 Nepal
 will struggle to advance toward self-reliance.

 Taken together, these metrics and sub-dimensions indicate that to further Nepal’s self-reliance, USAID
 should strategically invest in programs that: (1) improve government effectiveness, particularly as it
 relates to supporting the transition to federalism, the provision of basic public services, and inclusion of
 all citizens to realize the potential of Nepal’s promise of democracy; (2) reform economic policy and
 build economic capacity for all people (especially for women and marginalized groups) to provide new
 opportunities for economic growth; and (3) address the opportunities and risks that the environment
 poses to Nepal, reducing the risk of persistent shocks and also catalyzing future economic growth based
 on Nepal’s unique and rich environmental resources.

 During the course of this CDCS, the Mission envisions several strategic transitions on the J2SR: USAID
 will shift its focus to climate and disaster risk mitigation and away from post-earthquake recovery and
 reconstruction; health and education systems strengthening rather than service delivery; broad-based
 economic growth rather than focusing exclusively on agriculture; and consolidating democracy through
 partnerships that strengthen the entire federal governance ecosystem. To implement these transitions,
 USAID will more explicitly focus on sustainability and self-reliance issues related to financing self-reliance
 (FSR), private sector engagement (PSE), and building upon or redefining the development relationship
 (RDR) with Nepal. The Mission will also pursue opportunities for USAID to adopt more locally owned
 and led development models that put local actors in the lead; strengthen the host-country government’s
 leadership ability - at the central and local levels - in addressing, managing and funding their own
 development challenges; and support partnerships and approaches that expand access to finance,
 mobilize private capital, and improve access to markets. The Strategic Approach below discusses how
 USAID will operationalize this transition towards self-reliance and lay the foundations for the more self-
 reliant Nepal of tomorrow.

 STRATEGIC APPROACH
 The United States recognized Nepal in 1947, and the two countries established diplomatic relations in
 1948. Helping Nepal build a peaceful, prosperous, resilient and democratic society is a key US objective.
 USAID’s strategy will support Nepal to improve the livelihoods of its people through good governance,
 sound economic opportunity, improved public services, and world class environmental stewardship.
 During the development of the CDCS, three themes - federalism, inclusion, and resilience - repeatedly
 emerged as crucial and necessary approaches to realize Nepal’s development vision. USAID has woven
 these three strategic approaches throughout the CDCS across development objectives to ensure that
 USAID’s programmatic response adequately accounts for and integrates these factors that are crucial to
 successfully addressing Nepal’s development challenges.
 SUPPORTING THE TRANSITION TO FEDERALISM
 Nepal has embarked upon a difficult and complex, but strategic, transition to bring democracy closer to
 the people via federalism. Federalism, however, is not only a governance issue; it permeates all social
 and economic sectors and facets of life in Nepal and - if well implemented and managed - can serve as a
 vehicle to accelerate the country on its path to self-reliance. USAID will support the GON in the
 implementation of federalism as it is the model of democratic governance adopted by Nepal and is the
 approach through which the CDCS intends to plan, implement, and support to ensure success across all
 sectors. To work towards this goal, the Mission will: support policy development, systems, and practices
 across all levels of government; engage citizens and civil society organizations to actively participate in
 local decision-making and oversight; and help Nepal’s efforts to improve public budget execution so that
 it can channel its resources towards productive investments, improving effectiveness, transparency, and
 accountability of public expenditures.



10 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                  USAID.GOV
 USAID will calibrate efforts at both the national and subnational
 levels to assist Nepal to implement policy and operational shifts
 that devolve services and responsibilities to the appropriate level.
 The Mission will pursue G2G agreements to strengthen systems
 under federalism and increase accountability in support of
 improved governance. This CDCS will also support improved
 public financial management of host government resources as a
 means to create greater transparency and accountability, both for
 the public and for all levels of government to ensure the effective
 devolution of responsibility, authority, and budget.

 The devolution of public service responsibilities to the subnational
 level of government under federalism presents both an opportunity
 and a challenge, as local governments are eager to improve
 systems, but need greater capacity to deliver services. USAID will
 integrate federalism into its capacity building approach across all           “Federalism is not only a
 development objectives so that local actors - public officials,                     governance issue; it
 entrepreneurs, health care workers, educators, civil society                   permeates all social and
 organizations, and citizens - improve their understanding of
 federalism and contribute to its implementation. COVID-19 has                     economic sectors and
 exacerbated local government capacity gaps making local                     facets of life in Nepal and
 governments function less effectively. USAID will help increase              - if well implemented and
 capacity for local, healthcare, and education officials to ensure that      managed - can serve as a
 they can better plan, respond, and account for their devolved
 duties under federalism and be responsive to citizen needs.                vehicle to accelerate Nepal
                                                                                       on its path to self-
 In support of federalism, USAID will work with a wide variety of
 actors - including national and local officials, citizens, civil society
                                                                                                reliance.”
 organizations, and local businesses - to strengthen the
                                                                                       - USAID/Nepal CDCS
 implementation and oversight of federalism, build capacity of local
                                                                                          Strategic Approach
 actors, ensure that public services benefit all Nepalis, and create
 the conditions for sustainable local economic growth. Over the life
 of this CDCS, locally elected officials, including more women,
 youth, and members of marginalized groups, will become stronger
 interlocutors for citizen engagement, public service provision, and
 public accountability.

 To advance essential policy issues related to federalism, USAID will
 continue to play a significant role in coordinating support from
 donors, such as GIZ, DFID, the UN, World Bank, and EU, through
 the federalism working group. USAID will also maintain close
 collaboration with development partners engaged in health and
 education to ensure that donors supporting these tangible services
 - either through project or non-project modalities - under
 federalism are fully coordinated.
 INCLUSION AS A PRIMARY TARGET OF INTERVENTION
 With an estimated 40% of the population in Nepal considered to
 be marginalized, inclusion is simultaneously a challenge,
 programming opportunity, and overarching goal for the CDCS. To
 ensure this goal is fully implemented, USAID integrated inclusion




USAID.GOV                                                                                USAID NEPAL CDCS | 11
 within its strategy at every level, both to underscore the role inclusion must play to assist Nepal in
 achieving its development goals and to ensure that Mission programming directly addresses issues of
 exclusion throughout the implementation cycle. This approach has been further refined by an evidence-
 base illustrating which groups specifically have been historically marginalized and what fundamental rights
 remain unmet.

 While GON policies are largely in place, gaps remain in terms of implementation and overcoming
 historical systemic discrimination for marginalized groups. USAID recognizes the catalytic role that civil
 society will play in advocacy for and oversight of GON inclusion policies, especially human rights, equal
 access to public services, gender-responsive budgeting of host government resources, and risk mitigation
 measures to ensure resilience. Increasing the equity of access to health and education service will be
 critical to building the human capacity needed to improve livelihoods for those most vulnerable to
 economic exclusion and poverty.

 The Mission will undertake a concerted effort to more actively target marginalized groups and regions
 where appropriate (for example, removing barriers for women, youth and marginalized groups, which
 may include Dalits, Madhesi Other Caste, Tarai Janajatis, Muslims, and other ethnic and religious
 minorities). To further advance inclusion, USAID may coordinate efforts with other donors, such as the
 UN and contribute to the attainment of the UN's 2030 Sustainable Development Goals. The Mission will
 work closely with the U.S. Department of Justice and other development partners to implement human
 rights and counter trafficking in persons (CTIP) programming that address the problems that often arise
 from exclusion in Nepal.
 INTEGRATING RESILIENCE INTO OUTCOMES
 Nepal is routinely struck with disasters and shocks that erode development progress, reduce the
 effectiveness of governance institutions, exacerbate exclusion, keep the most vulnerable in poverty, and
 drive others into poverty. Shocks refer to “external short-term deviations from long-term trends that
 have substantial negative effects on people’s current state of well-being, level of assets, livelihoods, safety
 or their ability to withstand future shocks. Shocks can be slow-onset like drought, or relatively rapid
 onset like flooding, disease outbreak, or market fluctuations.” 26 COVID-19 and its secondary and
 tertiary effects on public services, the economy, and social structures and institutions is a new and
 severe shock, and is the latest in a long line of shocks that impact Nepal, including the insurgency,
 earthquakes, flooding, landslides, and other disasters. To make sustainable and lasting development gains,
 this CDCS will utilize a systems approach that takes into account the roles of interconnected sets of
 actors throughout Mission programming needed to advance resilience; two key means to build that
 resilience include engaging the private sector and strengthening government capacity.

 To promote resilience, the Mission will engage non-traditional stakeholders, including the private sector,
 to offer innovative, nimble, and sustainable approaches in the wake of natural disasters and other shocks.
 By promoting vibrant, diverse, and free market systems that are responsive to citizen needs, this CDCS
 will help to create an economy that provides ample opportunity for youth to seek employment at home,
 rather than turning to opportunities abroad as a mechanism to cope with shocks. It will also ensure that
 the economic makeup of Nepal is more diverse so that shocks to one sector or location are less capable
 of producing ripple effects that reverberate throughout the economy and threaten livelihoods on a large
 scale. Following a natural disaster, the private sector also has the potential to offer market-based
 solutions that can be more rapidly deployed than government or donor responses, while also reducing
 the strain on limited government resources. To implement this approach to resilience, the Mission will
 use an array of PSE tools - business incubation, business support services, entrepreneurial and financial
 support, information sharing, and workforce development - that will strengthen the capacity of the
 economy to progress, even when faced with the inevitable shocks and disasters.




12 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                   USAID.GOV
 To build more resilient government capacity, USAID will partner with the public health and education
 systems to plan, prevent, mitigate, and respond appropriately to shocks and disasters with available host
 country resources, minimizing the need for outside assistance. Working at both the national and sub-
 national levels, this CDCS will target health and education systems so they become more adequately
 prepared to mitigate and respond to current and future shocks so that they may continue to deliver
 services during crises and can recover more quickly from crises.

 RESULTS FRAMEWORK
 GOAL STATEMENT AND NARRATIVE
 “A more self-reliant, prosperous, and inclusive Nepal that delivers improved democratic governance and
 health and education outcomes” is USAID’s 2020-2025 CDCS goal. Based on USAID’s J2SR Country
 Roadmap for Nepal, a preponderance of evidence and experience, and the development priorities that
 emerged from the Mission’s inclusive CDCS process, “self-reliance,” “prosperity,” and “inclusiveness”
 are the main ideals where the Mission will advance Nepal’s J2SR. “Self-reliant” relates to the J2SR that
 has come to define USAID’s overarching approach to development and the framework by which we
 measure progress. “Prosperous” refers to the GON’s ambitions to achieve middle-income country
 status by 2030 and to the J2SR’s Poverty Rate metric, which is relatively low compared to its neighbors.
 “Inclusive” has been woven into every Development Objective (DO) as an important concept and
 operating principle given the widespread marginalization of 40% of the population (including religious
 and ethnic minorities), the socio-economic consolidation and concentration of power in the country,
 and the impending risk and threat that COVID-19 will push more Nepalis into poverty and further
 exacerbate inequality. Inclusive also refers to the need for Nepal to address long standing equity gaps
 among specific marginalized ethnic and religious minorities to realize its development goals.

 The second component of the goal statement focuses on supporting democracy and human capacity
 development, both of which are among Nepal’s greatest near-term development challenges that will
 shape development progress and its sustainability in the future. “Democratic governance” is key given
 Nepal’s recent transition and commitment to federal governance and the connection of federalism to
 almost all parts of socio-economic life in Nepal. The provision of critical public services - namely, health
 and education - is a measure of how well federalism is implemented and is an indicator of citizen
 capacity. Moreover, in the current context, COVID-19 disproportionately affects both health and
 education outcomes, reducing access and quality, especially for the most marginalized, exacerbating
 existing inequality and vulnerability.

 In regular consultation with all levels of government, donors, and civil society, USAID is able to
 effectively coordinate and leverage its resources, reduce overlap, and ensure local buy-in. Throughout
 the CDCS, USAID will analytically and opportunistically target its development efforts across Nepal
 using three lenses: identifying areas and actors where there is a medium to high level of commitment for
 change, but a medium to low level of capacity; prioritizing areas where a maximum number of
 marginalized populations are either direct partners or beneficiaries; and selecting areas and actors with a
 high potential for impact on systems and outcomes for Nepal. In some cases, such as education, support
 may be nationwide, while in other cases, such as agriculture, support may be limited to select growers in
 the Feed the Future zone of influence. Through regular internal and external consultative processes,
 USAID will define the beneficiaries and systems for intervention that offer the best opportunities for an
 effective partnership that will yield expected results.

 DO 1: MORE EFFECTIVE, PARTICIPATORY, AND EQUITABLE DEMOCRATIC ECOSYSTEM
 Development Hypothesis Statement: If Nepalis effectively engage with democracy, and if Nepali institutions
 include all citizens, and if governance institutions are capable of meeting citizen demand, then Nepal's




USAID.GOV                                                                                  USAID NEPAL CDCS | 13
 democracy will develop the systems and values needed to support a more prosperous, equitable, and
 self-reliant Nepal.

 Development Hypothesis Narrative: Several assessments 27 highlight that one of Nepal’s primary
 development challenges is the successful implementation of federalism, in particular building capacity at
 the sub-national level. 28 Additional assessments, including the J2SR Country Roadmap, have also pointed
 to meaningful 29 and equitable 30 participation in decision-making across sectors and at all levels, as well as
 government effectiveness, as critical to maintaining public trust in elected representatives and building
 self-reliance towards a stronger democracy.

 To address these gaps, “More effective, participatory, and equitable democratic ecosystem” is USAID’s
 first development objective. “Democratic ecosystem” describes the complex system formed by all of the
 interdependent structural (laws, institutions, systems, and the bureaucracy) and functional (civil society,
 media, and private citizens) parts that constitute a working democracy. Ultimately, the health and
 effectiveness of the democratic ecosystem is contingent on both the integrity of the structures and the
 trust and participation of the people.

 This DO supports many self-reliance metrics, as well as the effective delivery of democracy through
 federalism, a GON priority. Moreover, this DO will work to strengthen democratic systems, including:
 the integrity of electoral processes; the independence of media and information integrity; a robust civil
 society that is capable of government oversight, civic engagement and advocacy on behalf of citizen
 interests, including the political participation of women; advancing the rule of law and instituting anti-
 corruption measures; and citizen-responsive governance that upholds and protects fundamental rights.

 By strengthening government capacity/systems and building the foundations of accountable governance
 vital for reforms and broad-based economic growth, this DO will ensure that Nepal leads its own
 development efforts. Moreover, by improving accountability and reducing corruption through public
 financial management, this DO will also ensure that Nepal sustainably finances its own development
 efforts.

 The emergence of COVID-19 has impacted governance systems and caught elected officials at all levels
 unprepared. Sub-national governments are overwhelmed, making it difficult to provide participatory,
 accountable, and transparent COVID-19 responses and ensure that women, youth, and marginalized
 groups’ (WYM) equities are represented in decision-making. Citizens also need access to accurate
 information on the pandemic through CSOs and media. To mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 in Nepal,
 this DO will support sub-national governments to be more participatory, accountable and transparent,
 and therefore more targeted, in their COVID-19 response, as well as make citizens aware of COVID-19
 through information from CSOs and media. This DO will also take into account the increasing
 challenges of youth, women, and marginalized communities and their growing vulnerability to trafficking.
 IR STATEMENTS AND NARRATIVES
 Three interdependent intermediate results (IRs) support DO 1. Combined, they will strengthen both
 structural governance institutions to be more responsive to citizen demands and functional (civil society,
 media, and private citizens) governance components to create a more effective, participatory, and
 equitable democratic system.

 IR 1.1: INTEGRITY OF DEMOCRATIC SYSTEMS STRENGTHENED
 IR 1.1: “Integrity of democratic systems strengthened” will strengthen the supply side of democratic
 institutions - specifically sub-national governance, electoral processes, and public financial management -
 to improve their transparency, integrity, and accountability, ultimately making them more effective in the
 face of corruption that threatens to undermine the democratic system. 31 While the overarching policies




14 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                   USAID.GOV
 to enact federalism at the central level exist, to be fully effective
 devolution needs strong democratic process policies at the
 subnational level. To address these needs, USAID will: improve
 awareness and capacity of newly elected local officials; build human
 resource capacity within the sub-national government bureaucracy;
 and harmonize local and national policies concerning devolution. By
 increasing effective sub-national governance, USAID will counter
 corruption at the local level 32 and strengthen the ability of local
 governments to deliver services as mandated under federalism. 33
 USAID support for electoral processes will improve the integrity of
 political systems. To build greater transparency and government
 effectiveness, USAID will support public financial management
 (PFM) to reduce opportunities for fraud, waste, and abuse of public
 funds 34 both at the national and sub-national level.

 IR 1.2. EQUALITY UNDER THE LAW FOR WOMEN, YOUTH
 AND MARGINALIZED (WYM) COMMUNITIES IMPROVED
 IR 1.2: “Equality under the law for women, youth and marginalized       “By increasing effective
 (WYM) communities improved” will enact recommendations from             sub-national governance,
 various assessments to support women, youth, and marginalized           USAID will counter
 communities 35 via rule of law 36 to ensure that Nepal’s democracy
 delivers better on the constitutional promise of equality. 37 This IR   corruption at the local level
 will integrate gender equality and social inclusion via support for     and strengthen the ability
 human rights, including continued assistance to counter human           of local governments to
 trafficking. 38
                                                                         deliver services as
 While Nepali law and jurisprudence are relatively strong in             mandated under
 comparison to its South Asian neighbors in terms of the rights of       federalism.”
 women and rights against discrimination, laws and court decisions
 lack enforcement. As a result, the most marginalized groups,            - USAID/Nepal IR 1.1
 comprised of Dalits, Madhesi other Castes, Muslims, and Tarai
 Janajatis, which make up 40 percent of the population, 39 have been
 excluded from meaningful political participation and the full
 exercise of their rights. Up to 81 percent of the Dom, Santhal,
 Halkhor, and Marwadi minority groups lack citizenship due to non-
 existent birth registrations and other necessary legal documents,
 effectively excluding them from accessing basic rights. 40 Compared
 to other groups, women and marginalized groups have far less
 knowledge about their fundamental civil and political rights and the
 affirmative policies meant to benefit them, a compounding
 disadvantage for women from marginalized groups. Ninety-two
 percent of Nepali women are unaware about where to lodge
 formal complaints and only 28 percent believe that justice is easily
 accessible to all citizens. 41 Weak enforcement is due to dominant
 social norms that discriminate on the basis of gender, caste,
 ethnicity, and religion. Equal protection under the law can be
 advanced by expanding leadership opportunities for local leaders
 from WYM groups who understand the challenges faced and can
 sustain efforts to produce institutional change. This IR will
 specifically focus on WYM and decreasing the culture of impunity
 experienced by minorities; 42 increasing accountability for ensuring



USAID.GOV                                                                             USAID NEPAL CDCS | 15
 GBV crimes are brought to justice; strengthening rule of law for the most marginalized; improving
 access to justice for WYM; and protecting the fundamental rights of WYM (including, but not limited to,
 advancing religious freedom, rights of LGBTQI and addressing GBV and CEFM). These efforts will
 ultimately ensure that equality under the law for all groups (including men and majority communities) is
 improved. To support local systems, this IR will work with municipalities and judicial actors (police,
 prosecutors, judiciary, judicial committees, traditional leaders, and community mediators), while also
 promoting community engagement and actively targeting WYM. Additionally, this IR will be able to
 address the needs of women through increased public accountability and gender-responsive budgeting.

 IR 1.3. CITIZEN DEMAND FOR DEMOCRACY STRENGTHENED
 IR 1.3: “Citizen demand for democracy strengthened” will support the functional (civil society, media,
 and private citizens) components of the democratic ecosystem to increase citizen participation, 43
 improve effectiveness and decrease corruption 44 of institutions.

 This IR will enhance the leadership of civil society, improve oversight of public services, and support
 access to credible information. 45 Nepal's legal environment for the protection of civic space is complex,
 with multiple agencies and laws meant to oversee civil society organizations in Nepal. In addition,
 multiple draft pieces of legislation have recently been discussed in Parliament that could restrict
 fundamental freedoms of assembly, press, and association. In support of local systems, this IR will
 strengthen governance - at both the local and national levels where local civil society and media partners
 play a vital role in holding governments accountable to the public. Additionally, this IR will build the
 capacity of local systems, including non-government organizations, thematic networks, federations, and
 private sector actors (media houses) to support demand for democratic governance.
 DO 2: BROAD-BASED AND INCLUSIVE ECONOMIC GROWTH FOSTERED
 Development Hypothesis Statement: If Nepal is able to identify and seize upon emerging economic
 comparative advantages and enact meaningful reforms that support market-oriented and inclusive
 economic policies, then the foundations for broad-based economic growth will be significantly increased,
 making Nepal more prosperous, equitable, and self-reliant.

 Development Hypothesis Narrative: DO 2 “Broad-based and Inclusive Economic Growth Fostered” will
 contribute to the CDCS’s goal statement of a more self-reliant and prosperous Nepal. It also
 contributes to Nepal’s ambitious goal of reaching middle-income country status by 2030. 46 By supporting
 the transition of Nepal from over-reliance on less productive sectors with low returns to sectors that
 are more productive, and by increasing productivity for areas that are ripe for growth, this DO will
 foster economic growth that is both broad-based 47 and inclusive. 48 Analysis shows that increasing
 product diversity (broad-based) towards more complex products can accelerate an economy’s long-
 term growth rate by 1.6 percentage points for every one standard deviation increase in product
 complexity. 49 Similarly, a more inclusive economy boosts GDP growth; a 1% reduction in inequality
 increases GDP by 0.6% to 1.1%. 50 USAID investments will focus on high-growth sectors that
 demonstrate potential to meet domestic market demand, expand trade, generate income and
 employment, and reduce poverty.

 This DO contributes to Nepal’s J2SR by promoting economic governance and business models that
 strengthen Nepal’s economic sovereignty and promote positive linkages to fair economic trade and
 international norms. This DO will contribute to development progress within seven areas covered in
 the J2SR Roadmap - Business Environment, Trade Freedom, Poverty Rate, ICT Adoption, Government
 Effectiveness, Social Group Equality, Economic Gender Gap - and three components - RDR, FSR, and
 PSE. To promote broad-based and inclusive growth, DO 2 will strengthen the competitiveness of
 agriculture and non-agriculture sectors, improve the investment climate and business enabling
 environment through targeted policy engagement, and address the systemic barriers that prevent the full




16 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                               USAID.GOV
 participation of socio-economically disadvantaged segments of the
 population. This DO’s focus on economic activities that are
 primarily mediated through markets offer rich opportunities for the
 private sector to apply market-based solutions to development
 problems.

 COVID-19 has exacerbated Nepal’s constraints to the formation
 and growth of firms, imposing additional layers of constraint on
 enterprises, such as lack of profitability, cash flow problems, and
 solvency. Nepal will most likely experience one year without any
 growth in GDP, at a minimum, while impacts may last longer due
 to uncertainties as the outbreak continues to evolve. Should the
 impacts of COVID exceed current projections, the economy may
 continue to contract beyond the expected 12 months, which could
 lead to elements of an economic collapse and worsening food
 security. In response to COVID-19, the implementation of this DO
 will be strategically sequenced to provide relief, recovery, reform,
 and resilience. Beginning with relief, this DO will emphasize lifelines   “This DO contributes to
 to firms on the verge of insolvency so that they can survive the          Nepal’s J2SR by promoting
 pandemic. This may involve (under IR 2.2) advocating for a GON            economic governance and
 credit guarantee program and assisting firms to access GON
 financial assistance programs, or facilitating access to agricultural     business models that
 lending through farmers cooperatives (under IR 2.1). The recovery         strengthen Nepal’s
 phase of the DO will support efforts to enable firms to re-establish      economic sovereignty and
 profitability and thrive once the pandemic subsides. This may
 involve re-building disrupted supply chains (under IR 2.1), providing
                                                                           promote positive linkages
 technical and vocational training and accelerating digitization,          to fair economic trade and
 specifically targeting marginalized groups to increase their market       international norms.”
 participation and building private sector capacity to reach these
 vulnerable populations with services and inputs (under IR 2.2 and         - USAID/Nepal DO 2
 IR 2.4). Once firms regain solvency, this DO will shift to address
 longer-term capacity development to achieve profitability and
 competitiveness, such as accelerating the adoption of productivity-
 enhancing innovations and technologies, while pursuing policy
 reform opportunistically to improve the investment climate and
 business environment (under IR 2.1, IR 2.2, and IR 2.3).
 Throughout the life of the CDCS, this DO will concurrently
 reinforce resilience by integrating WYM, including harnessing the
 skills of migrant returnees, into markets to ensure that they
 connect to and benefit from the new economic opportunities that
 are created as the economy grows (under IR 2.4).

 IR STATEMENTS AND NARRATIVES
 Four IRs directly support DO 2 by linking economic growth with
 enterprise investment to improve productivity and enhance
 competitiveness, which in turn, attracts more investment as
 markets expand, and as a result creates a virtuous cycle that
 ultimately transforms an economy. Common traits characterizing
 transformed economies include: accelerated investment lasting
 more than a decade; increased world market orientation; increased
 share of more complex products for export; exponential growth in



USAID.GOV                                                                              USAID NEPAL CDCS | 17
 per capita GDP; decreased population growth rate; and increased investment in human capital. 51
 Enterprises invest when presented with market incentives and enabled by access to inputs/resources,
 which are ultimately determined as a country lowers the cost and risk of doing business and improves
 the functioning of input markets (absence of distortions and enhanced competition) through good
 economic governance and a favorable business enabling environment. GDP growth, while a necessary
 factor of economic transformation, is not a sufficient condition for achieving inclusive progress in living
 standards. Therefore, it is necessary to integrate marginalized and vulnerable groups into markets to
 increase the likelihood for them to connect to and benefit from new economic opportunities created by
 a growing economy.

 IR 2.1. INCLUSIVE, PRIVATE SECTOR-DRIVEN GROWTH IN AGRICULTURE PROMOTED
 USAID has been a steady partner in Nepal’s agriculture sector since the start of FTF in 2010,
 successfully advocating for market-led reforms that lay the foundation for broader economic growth in
 the near term. To build on USAID’s comparative advantage and strong GON support for the sector, IR
 2.1 “Inclusive, Private Sector-Driven Growth in Agriculture Promoted” will address agriculture
 productivity and policy needs. The agriculture policy environment is improving; there is an increasing
 openness to key policy reforms and a market-centric approach in agriculture. By focusing on agricultural
 production, the IR acknowledges that increasing on-farm labor productivity is necessary to improve the
 sector’s profitability and efficiency so that the labor can move to higher productivity non-agriculture
 areas. Gains in on-farm productivity alone will not propel Nepal to middle-income country status, but
 when coupled with strengthening off-farm market system actors, including all types of agribusinesses and
 food industries, and addressing critical gaps in food safety (sub-IR 2.1.2), it will form the foundation along
 with IR 2.2 to diversify Nepal’s economic growth. USAID will take an inclusive market system approach
 to this IR, facilitating linkages among producers, market actors (including agribusinesses and food
 industries), and consumers, ultimately stimulating sustainable private sector-led agricultural development
 and improving food security. Throughout this IR, USAID will take into account the effects of climate
 change on agricultural productivity, which will ultimately affect investments in off-farm market systems
 up the value chain. USAID will pilot various approaches to better link women, youth, and marginalized
 groups to markets, ensuring that these groups have opportunities for advancement and participation at
 different levels of agricultural value chains. Other important local actors will include think tanks and
 universities - to spur innovation - and relevant government actors to foster a strong enabling
 environment.

 IR 2.2 COMPETITIVENESS OF SELECT HIGH-GROWTH SECTORS INCREASED
 While Nepal’s productive capacity, as measured by the complexity index of the products that the
 country produces and exports, is greater than what is expected given its level of income, its economy
 clearly has the potential to grow through product intensification and diversification and by increasing the
 competitiveness of select high-growth sectors. 52 Nepal’s economy has not kept pace with its
 competitors, limiting market opportunities for Nepali enterprises and disincentivizing investment that
 ultimately weakens the country’s growth performance. 53 Additionally, Nepal ranks 69th of 77 countries
 in terms of labor productivity (GDP per labor employed), which is the lowest in all of Asia. 54 Growing
 evidence 55 suggests that “diversification” serves as the initial driver of growth, for enterprises to acquire
 mastery over a broader range of productive activities first, which will open more opportunities for
 countries to advance to more complex export products. To respond to these critical needs, USAID will
 have a new area of focus under IR 2.2: “Competitiveness of Select High-Growth Sectors Increased” and
 partner with a discrete number of enterprises in high-growth sectors to strengthen their capacity and
 competitiveness. USAID support will focus on services that will benefit the sector as a whole, and may
 include improving the access or availability of business development services, workforce skills
 development, financial products and services serving the sector, and expanding access to productivity-
 enhancing technologies. To support local systems, USAID will strengthen the capacity of private Nepali
 SME agribusinesses and facilitate relationships between local actors in order to expand sustainable and



18 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                  USAID.GOV
 inclusive agriculture market systems. Where necessary,
 investments under this IR will take into account the potential
 effects of climate change on high-growth sectors and market
 systems. USAID will also partner with local private actors and
 encourage cost-sharing arrangements in the delivery of services,
 products and technologies that will improve the sector’s
 competitiveness. The GON is making strides at policy reforms
 needed to spur competitiveness and attract FDI, and this IR will
 assist the GON to continue to streamline the policy approval
 process, enhance investment incentives and guarantees, and
 establish a robust dispute settlement regime. In addition, the GON
 has demonstrated a willingness to reform and requested the World
 Bank’s assistance to enact regulatory reform in order to lower the
 cost and risk of doing business in Nepal relative to other countries.
 USAID will coordinate with the World Bank and other donors,
 private sector actors, and relevant government stakeholders to
 advance this IR.
                                                                         “If Nepal is to achieve its
 IR 2.3 ECONOMIC GOVERNANCE AND BUSINESS ENABLING                        economic aspirations, it
 ENVIRONMENT IMPROVED                                                    needs to create a business
 In addition to competitiveness and private-sector driven growth,
 Nepal needs a business enabling environment that incentivizes           enabling environment that
 productivity-enhancing investment, rewards competition, and             incentivizes productivity-
 facilitates new market entrants, in order to achieve its economic       enhancing investment,
 aspirations. The lack of competition that has emerged due to the
 unclear economic governance, and insufficient business-enabling
                                                                         rewards competition, and
 and investment environments constrain the foundations to                facilitates new market
 economic growth in Nepal. 56 As a new area for USAID, IR 2.3:           entrants.”
 “Economic Governance and Business Enabling Environment
 Improved” acts on this need. This IR will support Nepal to improve      - USAID/Nepal IR 2.3
 its economic governance and the business enabling environment by
 incorporating international best practices in the policy and
 regulatory framework governing trade and investment in Nepal. It
 will also strengthen the capacity of GON agencies that implement
 those policies and regulations, streamlining their processes to
 lessen the regulatory burden borne by enterprises. USAID will
 leverage its convening power and leadership within the donor
 community to bring together like-minded development partners in
 advocating for and complementing economic policy and regulatory
 reforms that will improve Nepal's investment climate and business
 enabling environment.

 IR 2.4 MARGINALIZED AND VULNERABLE COMMUNITIES
 INTEGRATED INTO MARKET SYSTEMS
 As stated above, GDP growth alone is not sufficient to create
 broad-based economic growth that improves living standards for all
 Nepalis. For the most part, Nepal’s women, youth and marginalized
 groups (WYM) often operate in the informal segments of the
 economy that do not provide security and fair benefits to workers.
 Of the 21 million Nepali working age population, 61% (12.7 million)
 are engaged in self-contained economic activities for final own-



USAID.GOV                                                                             USAID NEPAL CDCS | 19
 household use. Of those engaged in economic activities for pay or profit, another 21% (4.4 million) are
 employed in the informal sector. Abundant empirical evidence 57 shows that improving economic
 inclusion boosts economic growth in the long-run and critical at this juncture of Nepal’s development.
 IR 2.4: “Marginalized and Vulnerable Communities Integrated into Market Systems” will work to
 integrate marginalized and vulnerable groups into markets and increase the likelihood for them to
 connect to, and benefit from new economic opportunities created by a growing economy. This IR will:
 enhance the participation of WYM in formal economic activities through entrepreneurship and/or skills
 training and job placement to ensure that they are securely integrated into market systems; stimulate
 entrepreneurship by increasing WYM’s access to business services that can enhance their productivity,
 including access to finance, technology, business licenses and registrations, and markets, including input
 markets, and; enhance meaningful private-sector representation of WYMs by expanding their leadership
 roles and ensure that private and public sector institutions prioritize WYM’s interests in their
 development activities and services. There is still a significant need to formulate and implement gender
 sensitive and socially inclusive economic laws and policies to foster an enabling environment for WYM
 private sector stakeholders (this includes understanding and mitigating the effects of social/gender norms
 and gender-based violence that hinder women’s economic empowerment). This IR will engage local
 actors such as WYM entrepreneur networks, vocational training centers, and various local private
 sector actors.
 DO 3: INCLUSIVE HEALTH & EDUCATION SYSTEMS STRENGTHENED
 Development Hypothesis Statement: If the quality of health and education services is improved, equitable
 access to health and education services is expanded, and the capacity of the health and education
 systems to prepare for and recover from shocks is increased, then health and education systems will be
 more inclusive and strengthened.

 Development Hypothesis Narrative: Marginalized groups in Nepal have not equally benefited from essential
 public services compared to other groups. In addition to the quality of education being unequal for girls,
 given a preference to invest in the sons’ future, children of Madhesi Other Caste, Madhesi Dalit, and
 Muslim communities have significantly lower school attendance and completion than their peers of other
 groups. 58 Marginalized groups also experience lower uptake of crucial health services and practices
 including toilet facilities, vaccination, antenatal care, and hospital delivery. 59 This marginalization from
 public services may also have unintended consequences including gender-based violence, and child, early,
 and forced marriage.

 Effective and inclusive health and education systems are important in and of themselves to build human
 capacity. In Nepal, they take on additional significance, as they represent the two basic and fundamental
 services by which Nepalis can tangibly see and feel the effects of federalism, as these services have been
 devolved to the local level to be more responsive to the needs of the constituents. The GON has
 recognized the importance of removing inequities through federalism in its Fifteenth Periodic Plan 60 and
 boosting social capital in order to meet Nepal’s long term development goals. Assessments 61 and the
 J2SR Country Roadmap have demonstrated that effective and inclusive health and education systems are
 essential to fulfilling the promises of democracy and economic growth for all Nepalis, and are the basis
 for a more prosperous, stable, and independent Nepal. Based on these critical needs and gaps, DO 3 is
 “Inclusive health and education systems strengthened.” Health and education “systems” 62 in this DO,
 refers to all the activities whose primary purpose is to promote, restore and/or maintain health and
 education, including the combination of people, institutions and resources, in accordance with
 established policies, to improve the health and education of the populations they serve. “Systems
 strengthening” therefore implies a process of identifying and implementing changes in policy and practice
 in a country’s health or education system, so that the country can respond better to its health and
 education challenges. 63 The building blocks of health and education systems strengthening include: i)
 leadership and governance, ii) financing, iii) human resources, iv) products and technologies, v)



20 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                 USAID.GOV
 information and research, and vi) service delivery. 64 “Inclusive” refers to the need to build equity in
 health and education systems and comprises several dimensions, including, but not limited to:
 gender/sex, sexual orientation, people with disabilities, religion, ethnicity/caste, socio-economic
 background, and geographic location. Given the systems approach of this DO, interventions will occur at
 all levels of federalized Nepal - central, provincial, municipal, and community. Driven by data and need,
 local level interventions will be targeted to build on past achievements or address persistent gaps in
 service delivery systems and outcomes. In some cases, geographic selection will align with interventions
 from other DOs to allow for synergies (for example, WASH and watershed management, nutrition and
 agriculture programming, or schools and health facility reconstruction). Technical interventions within
 this DO will focus on strengthening systems to deliver public services and target private service delivery,
 where appropriate.

 This DO contributes to the Goal by directly and indirectly advancing self-reliance metrics, as well as
 supporting the inclusive delivery of services to increase health and learning outcomes for all. This DO
 will contribute to development progress within four areas covered in the J2SR Roadmap - child health,
 education quality, social group equality, and government effectiveness - and three components - FSR,
 PSE, and RDR - to increase commitment through improved policy, transparency, accountability, and
 equity, and improve capacity through improved planning, implementation, and advocacy. Through a
 systems strengthening approach, this DO will target public financial management and governance issues
 to improve FSR. Similarly, by using G2G mechanisms in both education and health, this DO will be able
 to address key policy decisions and result milestones, advancing not only RDR, but also FSR. G2G
 mechanisms also allow this DO to leverage the contributions of other donors to multiply impacts. In the
 health sector, strengthening Nepali pharmaceutical companies, training of private providers, and public
 private partnerships will contribute to PSE efforts.

 In the current context, the socio-economic effects of COVID-19 on health and education systems have
 been tremendous. This has included: mounting infections; exceeding of the capacity of the health system
 to manage all COVID-19 cases; interruptions in routine non-COVID-19 health care; and education at a
 virtual standstill. Health systems, from the Ministry down to the lowest local level, have redirected
 technical and managerial attention, as well as already scarce financial and human resources, to deal with
 COVID-19. A positive sign throughout the pandemic has been the strengthening of systems-building
 processes and capacity development, as well as closer USAID-government relationships and
 consultations. On the education side, schools have remained closed since March 2020, with only a
 fraction of schools using digital technology to continue learning. While the Ministry of Education,
 Science, and Technology has been able to provide distance learning options, such as print materials,
 radio, television lessons, and increasingly digital online platforms, the majority of students do not have
 consistent access to these services. It remains unclear the extent of learning taking place under distance
 education. Currently, a Nepali student attending school for 11.7 years, when measuring learning-
 adjusted years of schooling, only receives about 6.9 years of education. 65 Given the disruption of
 COVID-19 to the education system, this is projected to decline even further. 66 Health service outcomes
 and quality have suffered, especially with regard to maternal and child health. 67 Institutional childbirth has
 declined, resulting in increases in neonatal mortality, and decreases in quality of care. Child immunization
 coverage and family planning have decreased, not only because of the lockdown, but also because of
 disruptions to the health commodity supply chain, which has resulted in health commodity shortages. If
 COVID’s impact worsens beyond current projections, deaths and infection rates may skyrocket,
 exceeding the health system’s capacity and causing a collapse of the system. If continued school closures
 remain in effect, Nepali students may not rebound from the loss of education, leading to lost learning
 and enrollment outcomes, and eventually losses in workforce development and economic productivity.
 To address the effects of COVID-19 in the near term, this DO’s focus on sustainable systems
 strengthening, with a particular emphasis on disaster/pandemic preparation and response, will facilitate
 the rapid diffusion of innovations from the fast-evolving science of COVID-19. In addition, USAID will



USAID.GOV                                                                                   USAID NEPAL CDCS | 21
 incorporate adaptive risk mitigation measures into its programming (including community-based
 programming and virtual outreach) to remain compliant with public health measures and protect all
 parties while finding alternative, safer means of achieving results.
 IR STATEMENTS AND NARRATIVES
 In support of DO 3 there are three, mutually-reinforcing IRs that define the three necessary and
 sufficient results to strengthen the health and education systems in Nepal’s context - quality, equity, and
 resilience. IR 3.1 and 3.2 unite many of the building blocks that comprise the definition of effective health
 and education systems. Given that Nepal is one of the most disaster-prone countries in the world, IR
 3.3 will address the need to strengthen the resilience of the health and education systems so that they
 are better able to prepare for disasters and respond to them appropriately when they occur, and to
 continue effective service delivery in the face of crises.

 IR 3.1. QUALITY OF HEALTH AND EDUCATION SERVICES IMPROVED
 IR 3.1: “Quality of health and education services improved” will address persisting quality gaps in
 health 68 and education. 69 In the Nepal context, high-quality systems require: governance and
 partnerships across sectors; platforms for service delivery; workforce numbers and skills; tools and
 resources, from materials to data; and the population’s health and learning needs and expectations.
 Additionally, effective systems need to measure and use data to learn and improve interventions. 70 As
 sub-national governments are newly responsible for delivering health and education services, USAID will
 work with the GON to strengthen health and education systems’ governance to address gaps in
 leadership, policy planning and implementation, public financial management, monitoring and supervision,
 and the availability and distribution of required materials/resources/supplies to where they are needed.
 Similarly, USAID will ensure that appropriate human resources are in the right places and with the right
 skills, which are critical to delivering quality services. Lastly, USAID will promote increased use of
 evidence-based interventions that reflect best practices, international standards, or innovative methods
 across the entirety of coverage areas to ensure that health and education outcomes are improved.
 Across this IR, USAID will engage with the GON to provide G2G assistance through various
 mechanisms, including results-based financing incentives, and technical assistance for systems
 strengthening. USAID will leverage support from other donors (WHO, UNICEF, DfID, GTZ, World
 Bank, ADB, JICA, Norway, Finland, EU, GPE) on sector-wide approaches, multi-donor funds, or
 common strategic frameworks for financing. To facilitate local ownership, interventions under this IR
 will work directly with both municipalities and provincial governments to assess capacity and develop
 tailored capacity-building interventions. Activities will work with other non-governmental local actors,
 such as sector committees (WASH, School Management Committee), operations and management
 committees (health facilities or schools), support groups, civil society organizations, and local businesses
 (such as media organizations or radio stations). By including a wide range of local actors in interventions
 designed to improve the quality of health and education services, these groups will help reinforce the
 responsiveness and sustainability of local service delivery systems.

 IR 3.2 EQUITABLE ACCESS TO HEALTH AND EDUCATION SERVICES IMPROVED
 Despite improvements over the past 20 years in health service utilization and in universal free basic
 education, there remain geographic areas with highly vulnerable populations, out-of-school children, and
 low uptake of health services. 71 In health, there are disparities in service utilization by gender,
 geographic area, socio-economic status, education, and caste/ethnicity, as well as by the disabled, and
 age groups such as adolescents. Given that health services are not always accessible to these
 marginalized populations, their health outcomes are generally poorer. 72 In education, the net enrolment
 rate at the basic level (grades 1-8) is 92.7%. Specific “last-mile” efforts are, therefore, needed for
 improved quality of service delivery, and to ensure that interventions reach marginalized groups in terms
 of both access and relevance of education. Moreover, assessments have indicated that learning
 outcomes among marginalized or disadvantaged students, poor and remote districts, and public schools



22 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                 USAID.GOV
 compared to private, are well below average. 73 Also, children with
 disabilities receive inadequate accommodations in Nepal to allow
 them to attend school and learn once in the classroom. In certain
 geographic areas, cultural norms and traditions prevent adolescent
 girls from completing their education. To address these challenges,
 IR 3.2: “Equitable access to health and education services
 improved” will improve equitable access for the most marginalized.
 Within this IR, “equitable access” to services indicates the need for
 relevant services that meet the diverse needs of beneficiaries by
 gender/sex, caste/ethnicity, culture, language, disability, wealth
 quintile, age, and geographic location. 74 Development efforts will be
 specifically customized to the particular needs of some in order to
 enhance the opportunity of access to all. USAID will customize the
 modes of service delivery to remove barriers for specific groups          “USAID will customize the
 and enhance the relevance of services through innovative and              modes of service delivery
 evidence-based models, and shape the contents of services                 to remove barriers for
 packages to meet specific beneficiary needs. This will include
 continuing to address the needs for GBV prevention and survivor
                                                                           specific groups and
 support. Additionally, policy work at the national and sub-national       enhance the relevance of
 levels will ensure that service delivery takes into account the           services through innovative
 specific needs of marginalized communities. USAID will also work          and evidence-based
 directly with local communities and community groups to build
 demand for quality services and ensure that these groups adopt
                                                                           models, and shape the
 high-impact interventions. This IR will leverage PSE and FSR to           contents of services
 intentionally mobilize market-based solutions and domestic                packages to meet specific
 resources towards prioritized areas with inadequate service               beneficiary needs…
 provision for marginalized groups.
                                                                           Development efforts will
 IR 3.3 HEALTH AND EDUCATION SYSTEMS’ CAPACITY TO                          be specifically customized
 PREPARE FOR AND RECOVER FROM SHOCKS INCREASED                             to the particular needs of
 As one of the most disaster-prone countries in the world, Nepal
 regularly experiences shocks that limit its ability to provide health     some in order to enhance
 and education services and maintain utilization of those services         the opportunity of access
 during and after the trauma. Currently due to COVID-19, health            to all.”
 data indicate greater difficulty providing and accessing care, or self-
 imposed delays to seeking care due to fear of infection. Likewise,        - USAID/Nepal IR 3.2
 schools have remained closed, severely limiting education and
 learning since the onset of the pandemic. Aside from COVID-19,
 seasonal floods and landslides repeatedly interrupt service
 continuity and jeopardize health and education outcomes. As was
 the case following the 2015 earthquake, health and education
 systems have not been adequately prepared to limit risks, reduce
 the impacts on beneficiaries, and maintain service delivery. IR 3.3:
 “Health and education systems’ capacity to prepare for and
 recover from shocks increased” will address this need. This IR will
 increase measures in health and education systems and facilities to
 prevent COVID-19 transmission, mitigate disease outbreaks during
 other types of emergencies, and will ensure that health and
 education systems are adequately prepared for current and future
 shocks. To reduce the impacts of disasters on service provision,
 this IR will promote evidence-based practices including but not



USAID.GOV                                                                               USAID NEPAL CDCS | 23
                                limited to: infection prevention control; comprehensive school
                                safety guidelines and plans, including school re-opening guidelines;
                                human resource allocations; safe facility construction; water
                                reserves; and advance procurement of supplies. Additionally, the
                                capacity of the health and education sectors will be strengthened
                                to include alternative modes of service delivery. That can include:
                                distance learning; virtual training and supportive
                                supervision/mentoring; teacher/volunteer mobilization to teach
                                smaller groups; accelerated and remedial education; multigrade
                                teaching; and community-based distribution of medicines. This will
                                both meet demand and inspire confidence in systems to safely
                                deliver during shocks. It will also ensure that systems do not
                                become overwhelmed, continue to deliver services during crises,
 “The environmental             and can recover more quickly from crises. To strengthen local
 richness of Nepal presents     systems and responses, USAID will work with existing emergency
 an opportunity to lift         structures and local entities (state and non-state) at the municipal
 Nepalis out of poverty; at     level, including municipal health and education departments, health
                                facilities and schools, Operation and Management Committees,
 the same time, natural         peer and community groups, and private sector actors.
 disasters repeatedly push
                                DO 4: MORE EQUITABLE & IMPROVED NATURAL
 the vulnerable back into       RESOURCES & DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT
 poverty and undermine          Development Hypothesis Statement: If Nepal effectively manages
 economic opportunity and       environmental opportunities and threats by protecting its natural
 potential for all. Improving   resources, developing its energy sector, and reducing the damage
                                caused by recurrent natural and human-made disasters, then more
 natural resources              sustainable and broad-based livelihood opportunities will be
 management and disaster        created and promising new sources of economic development
 risk management is crucial     opportunities will be realized.
 to Nepal’s long-term           Development Hypothesis Narrative: Nepal, like other countries in the
 sustainable social and         region, depends on its natural resources, including energy, water,
 economic development,          land, and clean air for long-term growth. Yet the sustainability of
                                these natural resources—and the vulnerable communities that
 stability, and                 depend on them for their livelihoods—are threatened by natural
 independence.”                 disasters, overuse, pollution, and infrastructure development that is
                                not always mindful of environmental and social safeguards. 75 The
 - USAID/Nepal DO 4             environmental richness of Nepal presents an opportunity to lift
                                Nepalis out of poverty; at the same time, natural disasters
                                repeatedly push the vulnerable back into poverty and undermine
                                economic opportunity and potential for all. Improving natural
                                resources management and disaster risk management is crucial to
                                Nepal’s long-term sustainable social and economic development,
                                stability, and independence.

                                Nepal’s unique biodiversity and natural attractions offer a one-of-a-
                                kind comparative advantage for tourism and create immense
                                untapped energy generation potential. In 2018, the tourism sector
                                generated $2 billion in revenue, contributed to 7.9% of GDP and
                                directly or indirectly generated employment for over a million
                                Nepalis. 76 In 2019, ecotourism attracted 50 percent of the 1.19



24 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                         USAID.GOV
 million tourists to Nepal, with 35 percent visiting national parks and conservation areas and an additional
 14 percent for trekking. 77 Nepal’s abundant natural resources also present an opportunity for renewable
 energy to catalyze further economic development, with an immense hydropower potential of more than
 80,000 megawatts (about 40,000 of which are considered economically viable), rich solar and wind
 resources, and growing cities ripe for economic development and sustainable transportation advances. 78

 Conversely, natural disasters (floods, landslides, earthquakes, fires, and glacial lake outbursts, among
 others) hinder growth and reduce Nepal’s GDP growth by an average of 1.5% per year. 79 According to
 multiple vulnerability indices, Nepal is among the most vulnerable countries in the world to global
 climate change, and about 32% of the total area and 28% of the total population of Nepal is exposed to
 risks from three or more hazards. 80

 Nepali households’ lack of resilience leaves them vulnerable to natural disasters and undermines their
 health, educational, and economic progress. An estimated 25 to 30 percent of Nepali households either
 fell into poverty for the first time or escaped poverty only to fall back into poverty between 2003 and
 2013. 81 The World Bank estimates that 700,000 Nepalis fell below the poverty line after the 2015
 earthquakes. 82 Thousands more have their lives and livelihoods swept away by floods and landslides
 every year. Poverty backsliding among vulnerable and socially excluded populations is compounded by
 the fact that these groups have limited social capital and possess little power in determining which
 services are prioritized and delivered from the government, the private sector, or other development
 actors.

 Assessments 83 and the J2SR Country Roadmap demonstrate the need for continued efforts under
 natural resource management to improve biodiversity conservation, strengthen disaster risk
 management systems, advance energy sector reforms, and reduce the risks for marginalized groups who
 are more reliant on natural resources and also less resilient to shocks from natural disasters. DO 4
 “More equitable and improved natural resources 84 and disaster risk management 85” represents the
 junction where the environment intersects with economic growth opportunities (nature-based tourism
 and hydro-power) and where the environment intersects with resiliency and safeguard opportunities
 (disaster risk management and decreasing the impact of disasters on those most vulnerable).

 Key interventions under DO 4 will be focused at the policy and planning level with national scale and
 impact. Site-based activities focused on enhancing natural resources (IR 4.1) will primarily focus on two
 conservation landscapes that the GON has identified as a high-priority due to their unique ecological
 attributes, significant biodiversity, and tourism value - the GON-designated Chitwan Annapurna
 Landscape and the GON-proposed Karnali Conservation Landscape. Securing these corridors is
 essential for nature-based tourism to meet its full potential as a driver of conservation and sustainable
 growth in Nepal. Disaster risk management (DRM) and resilience programming will be focused on
 disaster prone municipalities in each province as well as the Karnali River Basin, an area where the risks
 associated with floods and droughts are compounded by their overlap in areas of high poverty and low
 access to water and sanitation services.

 Equitable and effective natural resources and disaster risk management is necessary to achieve the
 CDCS goal, given the extent to which Nepal’s economy directly depends on its natural resource base,
 the extent to which disasters constrain growth and disproportionately impact vulnerable Nepalis, and
 the extent to which the livelihoods of a large percentage of its population depend directly on ecosystem
 services. 86

 This DO will contribute to development progress within three areas covered in the J2SR Roadmap -
 Government Effectiveness, Social Group Equity, Environmental Policy - and four components - PSE, FSR,
 and RDR. Private sector partners will alleviate some of the financing burden from the GON and provide
 innovative and sustainable natural resource management (NRM), energy, and DRM solutions, particularly



USAID.GOV                                                                                USAID NEPAL CDCS | 25
 for biodiversity conservation and energy needs. FSR resources will be used to help the government
 mobilize and leverage financing to respond and recover quickly when disasters occur and for enhanced
 disaster risk reduction. These efforts will reduce the need for donor funding. USAID will apply RDR
 principles to lay the foundations for nascent disaster mitigation, preparedness, and response institutions
 - such as the National Disaster Risk Reduction Management Authority (NDRRMA) - ultimately
 supporting sustained government effectiveness through this DO.

 In the current COVID-19 context, the lockdown and its economic fallout have increased
 unemployment, resulted in the return of substantial numbers of migrants, and strained overall resilience.
 To cope, more households turn to natural resources, threatening positive gains in conservation. Should
 effects exceed current projections, disaster preparedness, response, and management systems may
 become overextended. Additionally, households may become more vulnerable to shocks and resort to
 environmental crime and destruction as a coping mechanism. To mitigate impacts and risks, this DO will
 increase the capacity of the GON and civil society to conduct disease research and surveillance among
 humans, wildlife, and livestock at key interfaces. USAID will work to restore forests and wetlands to
 reverse fragmentation and degradation and increase habitat area and connectivity, thereby reducing
 potential zoonotic disease spillover threats. This DO will also: address the most damaging effects of
 COVID-19 on the energy sector (including decreased revenue collection and significant new financing
 constraints); build the institutional foundations through the NDRRMA and other institutions to
 contribute to the national COVID-19 response and to strengthen local disaster management
 committees as they respond to COVID-19 and future disasters; and support and improve the resilience
 of returning migrant workers, who could otherwise become more vulnerable and have a domino effect
 on the households they support through remittances, which are roughly equivalent to 25% of Nepal’s
 annual GDP.
 IR STATEMENTS AND NARRATIVES
 Four IRs support DO 4; USAID’s investments to enhance natural resource conservation (IR 4.1),
 accelerate Nepal’s energy sector transformation (IR 4.2), strengthen disaster risk management systems
 (IR 4.3) and increase the resilience of women, marginalized and vulnerable groups (IR 4.4) are necessary
 and sufficient intermediate results to achieve the overall development objective of more equitable and
 improved natural resources and disaster risk management.

 IR 4.1. NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION ENHANCED
 Biodiversity conservation and habitat protection have made impressive progress, most clearly illustrated
 by the recovery of the tiger population. This gain and others, however, are vulnerable to unplanned
 development, unequal enforcement of environmental and social safeguards, and the impacts of climate
 change. 87 IR 4.1 “Natural resources conservation enhanced” will improve biodiversity and natural
 resource safeguard elements that are core to the J2SR. Investments in this DO will address the
 underlying systemic issues of climate change impacts, habitat fragmentation, and wildlife crime that
 increase the risks of disease spillover, such as the current global pandemic caused by COVID-19. They
 also seek to mitigate the anticipated negative impacts on natural resources from an economic downturn
 and demographic pressures. This will be achieved through better management of watersheds and
 conservation areas, and creating additional livelihood opportunities for communities through natural
 resource-based enterprises that give them economic incentives to conserve resources, including
 biodiversity. Strengthening environmental and social safeguards will further mitigate the negative impacts
 of development and climate risks through, for example, green infrastructure and monitoring zoonotic
 diseases that can impact humans, wildlife, and livestock. Reducing environmental crimes, including illegal
 wildlife trafficking, mining and fishing, is a proven approach to conserving biodiversity, bolstering local
 governance systems, and reducing corruption. The GON has existing national level environment acts,
 policies, and strategies and is a signatory to international treaties, 88 but capacity gaps hinder effective
 implementation. Policies and strategies must also be adapted and applied to the federal context. In this



26 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                 USAID.GOV
 CDCS, improving safeguards policies, especially related to infrastructure development, facilitating
 economic incentive models for resource conservation, as well as social safeguards that protect
 indigenous people’s rights and prevent sexual harassment will be priorities. In support of local systems,
 this IR will strengthen the natural resource governance capacity of local and provincial governments
 within the new federal structure by scaling up its current support of community-municipality co-
 management models, imparting technical know-how, connecting to private sector initiatives, and
 facilitating municipal, provincial, and national policy and legislation in the sector. USAID will support
 work with CSOs to increase their capacity for advocacy for better, inclusive natural resource
 management and help improve citizen scientist capacity for resource monitoring.

 IR 4.2 SUSTAINABILITY OF THE ENERGY SECTOR IMPROVED
 Despite recent gains, approximately 20-25% percent of Nepali households remain off-grid. At roughly
 267 kilowatt hours per year, Nepal’s per capita electricity consumption has increased significantly in
 recent years, but remains among the lowest in the world, constraining growth and productivity. 89
 Developing Nepal’s energy potential may ensure its energy security and position Nepal as a reliable and
 clean energy supplier for the South Asia region, directly contributing towards enhancing regional
 connectivity, stability, growth, and self-reliance. Developments in the energy sector in Nepal particularly
 need to have sound environmental safeguards in place to avoid potential negative impacts to its
 environment, tourism, and vulnerable communities, which all rely on rivers for livelihoods. Energy access
 and security are central to the health and welfare of Nepalis and to Nepal’s future sustainable
 development, powering everything from health centers, to schools to new enterprises seeking to use IT
 in innovative and job-creating ways, 90 which is embodied in IR 4.2 “Sustainability of the energy sector
 improved.” The private sector will be a key partner for most investments under this DO, particularly for
 increasing energy generation. Continued energy generation advances will require more transparent and
 competitive procurements and effective public-private business models to catalyze private sector
 investment. In line with FSR, this DO will continue to work closely with the Nepal Electricity Authority
 on commercial loss reductions and operational management and performance improvement
 opportunities, and with Nepal’s new electricity regulator, the Electricity Regulatory Commission on
 developing the bylaws, directives and tariff guidelines that can help shape efficiency-improving
 competition and ensure cost recovery. To support local systems, interventions in support of this IR will
 carefully coordinate with relevant GON institutions to ensure our energy-sector partnerships adaptively
 meet the GON’s sector assistance priorities, engage with key local private sector and academic actors,
 and provide robust support for the GON’s plan to decentralize the energy sector.

 IR 4.3 DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS STRENGTHENED
 Investing in improved DRM is a proven and cost-effective means of advancing Nepal’s self-reliance
 priorities. The 2015 earthquakes killed 9,000 people, destroyed or severely damaged 811,000 homes,
 8,200 schools, and 1,200 health facilities. Reconstruction costs totaled $8 billion. Investments in risk
 mitigation greatly reduce the need for response. Every $1 invested in DRM reduces the need for
 response by $6 on average. 91 For the 2015 earthquakes, less than 3% of the damage to buildings and
 infrastructure was covered by some form of insurance, and it is estimated that 80% of the Nepali
 population has no insurance for their real property. 92 Nepal desperately needs to complete and
 implement a Disaster Risk Financing Strategy that will ensure that the right investments are made ahead
 of the next disaster to not only support enhanced implementation of DRM but leverage global equity
 and insurance markets to ensure that they have the resources to adequately respond to future disasters
 when they strike. IR 4.3 “Disaster risk management systems strengthened” will continue to develop the
 nascent institutional and governance foundations for disaster risk management systems to respond to
 the various shocks that continue to threaten Nepali lives and livelihoods. Though progress has been
 made in recent years to formulate and pass laws, regulations, and codes to ensure public infrastructure,
 homes and commercial buildings are built to withstand natural hazards, enforcement of these rules is
 often lacking, especially in the informal sector, which produces the majority of housing in Nepal. USAID



USAID.GOV                                                                                USAID NEPAL CDCS | 27
 will seek partnerships with private sector construction firms to increase compliance with disaster
 resilient building codes and international best practices for disaster resilient construction. To increase
 sustainability, USAID will help governments, businesses, and homeowners better calculate and price
 disaster risk in Nepal and make strategic decisions about when and how they will retain and transfer
 that risk, including through risk sensitive insurance pricing that will incentivize disaster resilient practices.

 The first response in any disaster happens at a community level. Federalism has reinforced this reality by
 giving broad new DRM roles to local governments and local disaster management committees (DMCs).
 As a result, it is critical that community groups and the DMCs are adequately trained to implement
 lifesaving actions when early warning is given and in the immediate aftermath of a disaster. There is also
 deep local knowledge that can be tapped at a community level to help us better tailor activities designed
 to reduce disaster risk. To support local systems, this IR aims to strengthen the NDRRMA at the center,
 provincial and local disaster management committees, community-based organizations, as well as
 national and local businesses.

 IR 4.4 RESILIENCE OF WOMEN, MARGINALIZED AND VULNERABLE GROUPS INCREASED
 Vulnerability to the impact of disasters 93 and environmental shocks and stressors 94 is increased by
 gender inequality, particular gender norms and social marginalization. Moreover, data 95 reveals that
 marginalized groups are more likely to live in chronic poverty compared to others and overall resilience
 capacities across caste groups are highly impacted by their levels of education, household assets and
 social capital. 96 Disasters reinforce, perpetuate and increase gender inequality and social discrimination. 97
 They compound existing inequalities and vulnerabilities - the poorest people are more likely to suffer
 death, injury and damage to property, as they live in more hazard-exposed areas and are less able to
 invest in risk-reducing measures - leaving the most marginalized furthest behind. 98 Under IR 4.4
 “Resilience of women, marginalized and vulnerable groups increased”, USAID will work to address
 gender, caste and ethnic disparities that have made women and historically marginalized populations
 more vulnerable and less likely to recover from shocks and stresses. “Resilience” refers to the ability of
 people, households, communities, countries, and systems to mitigate, adapt to, and recover from shocks
 and stresses in a manner that reduces chronic vulnerability and facilitates inclusive growth. “Marginalized
 and Vulnerable” refers to people who are typically denied access to legal protection or social and
 economic participation and programs (i.e., police protection, political participation, access to healthcare,
 education, employment), whether in practice or in principle, for historical, cultural, political, geographical
 and/or other contextual reasons. The GON’s policy for grant disbursement for housing reconstruction
 was based on ownership, which posed a big setback for female headed households, joint families and
 households with no formal ownership. 99 These groups often suffer from discrimination in the application
 of laws and policy and/or access to resources, services, and social protection, and may be subject to
 persecution, harassment, and/or violence. To disrupt the endless cycle of poverty, particularly for
 women, marginalized and vulnerable groups, this IR will enhance leadership opportunities, meaningful
 participation in decision making, and improve the access to resources to ultimately improve resilience
 and equity. In support of local systems, USAID will utilize a process for identifying and engaging the
 marginalized and vulnerable communities to identify the key constraints and power dynamics that hinder
 meaningful participation in government, private sector, civil society and donor development assistance.

 MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING
 USAID’s Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) approach will promote accountability, learning, and
 evidence-based programming. In order to measure progress of achieving the CDCS objectives, the
 Mission will utilize Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) techniques to continuously monitor
 progress, evaluate performance and impact of its activities, learn from a wide variety of data sources,
 and adapt its implementation.




28 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                     USAID.GOV
 ANNEXES
     A. Journey to Self-Reliance Country Roadmap
     B. Endnotes




USAID.GOV                                          USAID NEPAL CDCS | 29
 A. JOURNEY TO SELF-RELIANCE COUNTRY ROADMAP




30 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                          USAID.GOV
USAID.GOV   USAID NEPAL CDCS | 31
 B. ENDNOTES


 1 MOF Budget Speech and NRB's Balance of Payments Statements include money coming in as Grants.
 2 World Bank. Gross Fixed Capital Formation, Private Sector (% of GDP) and World Bank. Foreign Direct Investment, Net
 Inflows (% of GDP)
 3 Gurung, Yogendra B., Pradhan, Meeta S. & Shakya, Dhanendra V. (2020). State of Social Inclusion in Nepal: Caste, Ethnicity
 and Gender [Evidence from Nepal Social Inclusion Survey 2018]. Kathmandu: Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan
 University
 4 Brhane, M., Rana, P.S. & Shah, T.N. (2020). Nepal Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Analysis 2020
 5 Gurung, Yogendra B., Pradhan, Meeta S. & Shakya, Dhanendra V. (2020). State of Social Inclusion in Nepal: Caste, Ethnicity
 and Gender [Evidence from Nepal Social Inclusion Survey 2018]. Kathmandu: Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan
 University.
 6 Brhane, M., Rana, P.S. & Shah, T.N. (2020). Nepal Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Analysis 2020.
 7 Under-five and neonatal mortality rates have declined by nearly 70 percent and 60 percent respectively. over the past 20
 years.
 8 Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2020). Integrated Education Management Information System (Flash I) 2019/20
 shows the Net Enrolment Rates at 96.6% and 92.7% at lower basic (grade 1-5) and upper basic (grades 1-8) respectively.
 9 Learning Adjusted years of schooling, a Nepali student only receives about 6.9 years of schooling despite attending school for
 11.7 years - a clear sign of poor quality.
 10 Ministry of Health Nepal, New ERA Nepal, and ICF (2017). Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2016, GON CBS and
 UNICEF (2015). Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2014, Suaahara II 2019 Household Survey_Family Planning, and the
 MOHP’s information systems such as Health Management Information System (HMIS) and Logistics Management Information
 System (LMIS) data and trends indicate that despite progress, Nepal falls short on equitable health outcomes, especially for
 women of reproductive age/mothers, adolescents and children.
 11 Bessières, H., Dolidze, N., Peano, S., Ray, S., Pant, B.B., Khanal, D. et al. (2019). School Sector Development Plan (SSDP) Mid-
 Term Review as well as the National Assessment of Student Achievement of grades 3, 5 and 8, have indicated that learning
 outcomes among marginalized or disadvantaged students, poor and remote districts, and public schools compared to private,
 are well below average.
 12 Nepal National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (2014 - 2020), July 2014.
 13 ADB, 2020, Hydropower and Economic Development in Nepal.
 14 ADB, 2020, Hydropower and Economic Development in Nepal.
 15 UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (2019) Disaster Risk Reduction in Nepal: Status Report 2019.
 16 Government of Nepal (2019) Fifteenth Periodic Plan with Long Term Vision.
 17 See https://selfreliance.usaid.gov/country/nepal for the latest Country Roadmap.
 18 Pradhan, Meeta S. and Y.B. Gurung. (2020). “Who are left behind? Tracking Progress on the Sustainable Development Goals
 in Nepal.” Kathmandu: Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan University.
 19 Gurung, Yogendra B., Pradhan, Meeta S. & Shakya, Dhanendra V. (2020). State of Social Inclusion in Nepal: Caste, Ethnicity and
 Gender [Evidence from Nepal Social Inclusion Survey 2018]. Kathmandu: Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan
 University
 20 IMF (2019) Nepal Article IV Review: Selected Issues. Chapter 2 - Managing Effective Federalism.
 21 The Government of Nepal National Planning Commission. Sustainable Development Goals 2016-2030 National (Preliminary)
 Report 2015
 22 United Nations Development Programme and Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative. 2020. Global
 Multidimensional Poverty Index 2020. Charting pathways out of multidimensional poverty: Achieving the SDGs
 23 Gurung, Yogendra B., Pradhan, Meeta S. & Shakya, Dhanendra V. State of Social Inclusion in Nepal : Caste, Ethnicity and
 Gender (2020) Kathmandu: Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan University
 24 World Bank. 2018. The Human Capital Project
 25 See Annex F.
 26 Sagara, B. (2018). Resilience Measurement Practical Guidance Note Series 2: Measuring Shocks and Stresses.
 27 World Bank (2019). Capacity Needs Assessment for the Transition to Federalism
 28 Lis, J., Pradhan, P., Pandey, C. & Pradhan, A. (2019). Nepal Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Assessment
 29 USAID DRG Center (2019). Nepal Development Context Assessment
 30 Brhane, M., Rana, P.S. & Shah, T.N. (2020). Nepal Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Analysis 2020




32 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                                      USAID.GOV
 31 Lis, J., Pradhan, P., Pandey, C. & Pradhan, A. (2019). Nepal Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Assessment
 32 GoN CIAA (2020). A Study on Local Government-Level Corruption (2018-2019) (in Nepali)
 33 Lis, J., Pradhan, P., Pandey, C. & Pradhan, A. (2019). Nepal Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Assessment
 34 Lis, J., Pradhan, P., Pandey, C. & Pradhan, A. (2019). Nepal Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Assessment
 35 USAID DRG Center (2019). Nepal Development Context Assessment
 36 Lis, J., Pradhan, P., Pandey, C. & Pradhan, A. (2019). Nepal Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Assessment; and
 Pokharel, B. and Pradhan, M. (2020). “State of Inclusive Governance in Nepal”. Kathmandu: Central Department of
 Anthropology, Tribhuvan University.
 37 Freedom House (2019). Freedom in the World 2019, Democracy in Retreat
 38 Lis, J., Pradhan, P., Pandey, C. & Pradhan, A. (2019). Nepal Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Assessment
 39 Gurung, Yogendra B., Pradhan, Meeta S. & Shakya, Dhanendra V. (2020). State of Social Inclusion in Nepal: Caste, Ethnicity and
 Gender [Evidence from Nepal Social Inclusion Survey 2018]. Kathmandu: Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan
 University
 40 Brhane, M., Rana, P.S. & Shah, T.N. (2020). Nepal Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Analysis 2020
 41 Pokharel, B. and Pradhan, M. (2020). State of Inclusive Governance in Nepal. Kathmandu: Central Department of
 Anthropology, Tribhuvan University
 42 USAID DRG Center (2019). Nepal Development Context Assessment
 43 USAID DRG Center (2019). Nepal Development Context Assessment.
 44 Lis, J., Pradhan, P., Pandey, C. & Pradhan, A. (2019). Nepal Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Assessment.
 45 Lis, J., Pradhan, P., Pandey, C. & Pradhan, A. (2019). Nepal Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Assessment.
 46 Government of Nepal (2019) Fifteenth Periodic Plan with Long Term Vision
 47 Broad-based in this context is defined as: Increasing product diversity towards more complex products.
 48 Inclusive is in this context defined as: benefitting not just the dominant socio-economic groups, but also women, youth, and
 marginalized populations.
 49 Hausmann, R. Hidalgo, C. et al. 2011. The Atlas of Economic Complexity.
 50 OECD. Growth and Inequality: A Close Relationship.
 51 USAID/Nepal. 2020. Nepal PSE Assessment, 2020
 52 Hausmann, R. Hidalgo, C. et al. 2011. The Atlas of Economic Complexity; Atlas of Economic Complexity. Atlas 5.1, 2020
 53 USAID/Nepal. 2020. Nepal PSE Assessment, 2020
 54 World Economic Forum. 2018. The Inclusive Development Index 2018: Summary and Data Highlights
 55 Rodrik, D. 2004. Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century
 56 USAID/Nepal (2020). Nepal PSE assessment, 2020.
 57 OECD. Growth and Inequality: A Close Relationship.
 58 Brhane, M., Rana, P.S. & Shah, T.N. (2020). Nepal Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Analysis 2020.; and Gurung, Yogendra
 B., Pradhan, Meeta S. & Shakya, Dhanendra V. (2020). State of Social Inclusion in Nepal: Caste, Ethnicity and Gender
 Kathmandu: Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan University
 59 Ministry of Health Nepal, New ERA Nepal, and ICF (2017). Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2016, GON CBS and
 UNICEF (2015). Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2014, Suaahara II 2019 Household Survey_Family Planning, and the
 MOHP’s information systems such as Health Management Information System (HMIS) and Logistics Management Information
 System (LMIS) data and trends indicate that despite progress, Nepal falls short on equitable health outcomes, especially for
 women of reproductive age/mothers, adolescents and children
 60 Government of Nepal (2019) Fifteenth Periodic Plan
 61 USAID DRG Center (2019). Nepal Development Context Assessment
 62 WHO (2011). Health Systems Strengthening Glossary
 63 WHO (2011). Health Systems Strengthening Glossary
 64 WHO (2010). Monitoring the Building Blocks of Health Systems: A Handbook of Indicators and Their Measurement
 Strategies
 65 World Bank. 2018. The Human Capital Project
 66 Learning Loss as a Result of COVID-19 in Nepal
 67 Lancet Global Health, Aug 10, 2020 Nepal COVID Lockdown impacts_Facility MNH_Aug 2020
 68 Ministry of Health, Nepal; New ERA, Nepal; Nepal Health Sector Support Program (NHSSP); and ICF (2017). Nepal Health
 Facility Survey 2015




USAID.GOV                                                                                                   USAID NEPAL CDCS | 33
 69 NORC at University of Chicago (2020).      Impact Evaluation of the Early Grade Reading Program in Nepal - Endline report
 (Draft)
 70 Kruk, M.E., Gage, A.D., Arsenault, C., Jordan, K., Leslie, H.H., Roder-DeWan, S. et al. (2018). High-quality health systems in
 the Sustainable Development Goals era: time for a revolution
 71 USAID DCHA/DRG (2018). Suggested Approaches for Integrating Inclusive Development Across the Program Cycle and in
 Mission Operations (ADS 201 Additional Help).
 72 Ghimire, U., Manandhar, J., Gautam, A., Tuladhar, S., Prasai, Y. & Gebreselassie, T. (2019). Inequalities in Health Outcomes
 and Access to Services by Caste/Ethnicity, Province, and Wealth Quintile in Nepal.
 73 Ministry of Education Science and Technology (2019), Nepal. Mid-term review of the MOEST’s national School Sector
 Development Plan (2016-2021) as well as the National Assessment of Student Achievement of grades 3, 5 and 8.
 74 Consolidated Equity Strategy, 2014, MOEST and Equity Index in Education, 2018, MOEST.
 75 In this DO, “safeguards” refers to the tools to prevent and mitigate harm to the environment and people during
 development.
 76 World Travel and Tourism Council (2019) WTTC Travel & Tourism Economic Impact Report
 77 Ministry of Culture, Tourism, and Aviation (2020) Nepal Tourism Statistics 2019
 78 K.C. Surendra et al. (2010) Current status of renewable energy in Nepal: Opportunities and challenges.
 79 UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (2019) Disaster Risk Reduction in Nepal: Status Report 2019
 80 United Nations Development Programme (2011) Disaster Risk Reduction In Nepal Flagship Programmes
 81 Vidya Diwakar, Overseas Development Institute (2018). Resilience and Sustainable Poverty Escapes in Nepal.
 82 Government of Nepal, National Planning Commission (2015). Nepal Earthquake 2015 Post Disaster Needs Assessment Vol.
 A: Key Findings
 83 USAID (2019) Biodiversity and Tropical Forests Analysis, USAID (2019) Disaster Risk Assessment
 84 “Natural resources” are materials found in nature that can be exploited for economic gain which may be renewable (e.g.,
 forests, wind, water) or nonrenewable (e.g., fossil fuels).
 85 “Disaster Risk Management” (DRM) as a term encompasses the whole disaster cycle from response and recovery to risk
 reduction and preparedness.
 86 “Ecosystem services” as defined by USAID’s Biodiversity Policy entails the short- and long-term benefits people obtain from
 ecosystems which includes: 1) provisioning goods and services, or the production of basic goods such as food, water, fish, fuels,
 timber, and fiber; 2) regulating services, such as flood protection, purification of air and water, waste absorption, disease
 control, and climate regulation; 3) cultural services that provide spiritual, aesthetic, and recreational benefits; and 4) supporting
 services necessary for the production of all other ecosystem services, such as soil formation, production of oxygen, crop
 pollination, carbon sequestration, photosynthesis, and nutrient cycling.
 87 USAID/Nepal 2020 Biodiversity and Tropical Forests Analysis
 88 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
 Change (UNFCC)
 89 Electricity consumption increases to 267 units (02/13/2020): The Himalayan Times and World Bank global data
 90 International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (2012): Global Energy Assessment
 91 Multihazard Mitigation Council (2017) Natural Hazard Mitigation Saves 2017 Interim Report: An Independent Study –
 Summary of Findings. Principal Investigator Porter, K.; co-Principal Investigators Scawthorn, C.; Dash, N.; Santos, J.; P.
 Schneider, Director, MMC. National Institute of Building Sciences, Washington.
 92 Pengwern Associates. 2020 Presentation to the USAID/Nepal.
 93 Wisner, Ben. (2017). The Next Paradigm Shift: From 'Disaster Risk Reduction' to 'Resisting Disaster Risk Creation'. Wisner
 et al. 2012.UNIS
 94 Bahadur, A.V., Tanner, T., King, D., Kirbyshire, A. and Morsi, H. (2015) Resilience Scan October-December 2015: A review
 of literature, debates and social media activity on resilience, Overseas Development Institute, London.
 95Central Bureau of Statistics, Nepal. Nepal Living Standards Survey (NLSS). https://cbs.gov.np/wp-
 content/upLoads/2018/12/Statistical_Report_Vol1.pdf
 96 Nepal Resilience Research Report, (2017); USAID Nepal GESI Analysis 2020
 97 Dwyer, E. and Woolf, L. (2018) Down by the river: addressing the rights, needs and strengths of Fijian sexual and gender
 minorities in disaster risk reduction and humanitarian response
 98 Lovell, E. and V. Le Masson (2014), Equity and inclusion in disaster risk reduction: Building resilience for all, Climate and
 Development Knowledge Network and Overseas Development Institute, London.
 99 Tamang, Mukta S., Shakya, D.V., Pradhan, Meeta S., Gurung, Yogendra B., and Mabuhang, B. (2020). “Community Resilience
 Capacity: A Study on Nepal's 2015 Earthquakes and Aftermath.” Kathmandu: Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan
 University.


34 | USAID NEPAL CDCS                                                                                                        USAID.GOV
