Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                              Document of
                                                                          The World Bank Group

                                                                         FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                                                                                                Report No:
                                                                                                                                CPF0000022




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                          INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
                                                            INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
                                                         MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

                                                                COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK

                                                                                      FOR




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                    NEPAL

                                                                     FOR THE PERIOD FY2025 - 2031

                                                                                  [P502276]




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Maldives, Nepal, and Sri Lanka Country Management Unit
                               South Asia Region

                               The International Finance Corporation
                               South Asia Region

                               The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                                        duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Group authorization.
                                      CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                              (Exchange Rate Effective as of April 5, 2025)
                                  Currency Unit = Nepali Rupee (NPR)
                                         US$ 1 = NPR 136.87

                                                 FISCAL YEAR
                                               July 16 – July 15

                                    ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADB       Asian Development Bank                           MAPS     Methodology for Assessing Procurement
Cat DDO   Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option                      Systems
CCDR      Country Climate and Development Report           MDTF     Multi-Donor Trust Fund
CEM       Country Economic Memorandum                      MIGA     Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
CLR       Completion and Learning Review                   MSME     Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
CPE       Country Program Evaluation                       NDC      Nationally Determined Contributions
CPF       Country Partnership Framework                    NEET     Not in Education, Employment, or Training
DFS       Digital Financial Services                       NLSS     Nepal Living Standards Survey
DPC       Development Policy Credit                        NPR      Nepali Rupee
DRM       Disaster Risk Management                         OECD     Organization for Economic Co-operation and
DSA       Debt Sustainability Analysis                              Development
e-GP      Electronic Government Procurement                PBL      Performance-based Lending
ESF       Environment and Social Framework                 PFM      Public Financial Management
EU        European Union                                   PLR      Performance and Learning Review
FCDO      Foreign and Commonwealth Development             PPP      Public Private Partnership
          Office                                           PPP      Purchasing Power Parity
FDI       Foreign Direct Investment                        PSW      Private Sector Window
FY        Fiscal Year                                      SCD      Systematic Country Diagnostic
GDP       Gross Domestic Product                           SDC      Swiss Agency for Development and
GIZ       Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale                  Cooperation
          Zusammenarbeit                                   SDR      Special Drawing Rights
GNI       Gross National Income                            SME      Small and Medium Enterprises
GPE       Global Partnership for Education                 SRSP     Shock-responsive Social Protection
GROW      Global and Regional Opportunities Window         TA       Technical Assistance
IDA       International Development Association            TF       Trust Funds
IEG       Independent Evaluation Group                     TSA      Treasury Single Account
IFC       International Finance Corporation                UNDP     United Nations Development Programme
ILO       International Labour Organization                UNESCO   United Nations Educational, Scientific and
IMF       International Monetary Fund                               Cultural Organization
IPF       Investment Project Financing                     WB       The World Bank
JICA      Japan International Cooperation Agency           WBG      World Bank Group
KfW       Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau                   WHO      World Health Organization
KWPF      Korea World Bank Partnership Facility



                              World Bank                         IFC                        MIGA
 Vice President         Martin Raiser                 Riccardo Puliti              Deepti Jerath (Acting)
 Director               David N. Sislen               Imad Najib Ayed Fakhoury     Sebnem Erol Madan
 Task Team Leaders      Sara Gustafsson               Mahima Khanna                Persephone Economou




                                                      ii
                                         FY25-31 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK
                                                           FOR
                                                          NEPAL




Contents
I.              INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................1
II.             COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ..............................................................2
       2.1      Social and Political Context .................................................................................................2
       2.2      Recent Economic Developments and Outlook ......................................................................3
       2.3      Poverty and Shared Prosperity on a Livable Planet ...............................................................5
       2.4      Main Development Challenges ............................................................................................6
III.            WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK .............................................................7
       3.1 Government’s Program and Medium-Term Strategy .................................................................7
       3.2 Lessons Learned and Feedback from Consultations ...................................................................7
       3.3 Overall Approach and Selectivity Going Forward ......................................................................8
       3.4      Proposed CPF Program ...................................................................................................... 10
       CPF Outcome 1: More and Better Jobs .................................................................................................. 11
       CPF Outcome 2: Connected Communities ............................................................................................. 14
       CPF Outcome 3: Green Planet and Resilient Populations ...................................................................... 16
IV.             IMPLEMENTING THE CPF ................................................................................................... 19
       4.1      Financing Envelope ........................................................................................................... 19
       4.2      Operationalizing the CPF ................................................................................................... 20
       4.3      Partnerships ..................................................................................................................... 22
       4.4      Knowledge and Data ......................................................................................................... 23
V.              MANAGING RISKS TO THE PROGRAM ................................................................................ 23
Annex 1: CPF Results Framework ........................................................................................................ I
Annex 2: Completion and Learning Review ........................................................................................ II
Annex 3: Streamlined 2024 Systematic Country Diagnostic for Nepal ................................................ III




                                                                          iii
                        FY2025-31 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK FOR NEPAL


                                                     I.         INTRODUCTION
1.       Nepal’s poverty reduction story over the last 30 years is nothing short of remarkable; its
US$2.15 poverty rate fell from over 55 percent in 1995 to 0.37 percent in 2022,1 a feat as impressive
as almost any country in history. Yet, it has done so without transformative domestic growth,
investment, or job creation. Nepal’s greatest challenge now is to realize its full potential by building
an economy that creates sustained domestic growth and jobs. Nepal’s reliance on remittances –
which has been such an important element in the country’s poverty reduction story – has been central
to the country’s growth but has not translated into quality jobs at home, reinforcing a cycle of lost
opportunities and the continued departure of many Nepalis abroad in search of employment. A
staggering 82 percent of Nepal’s workforce is in informal employment, far higher than global and
regional averages.2 Nepal is also highly exposed to natural disasters and climate shocks – it is the
second most vulnerable country globally to mortality risk from multiple hazards,3 including
earthquakes, natural disasters (including those exacerbated by a changing climate), and disease
outbreaks. Growth and development in Nepal cannot happen without sustained efforts to reduce
risks, prepare for crises, and build resilience across the economy to these threats.
2.      Two critical development challenges – (i) job-creating growth and (ii) resilience to natural
disasters, including those caused or exacerbated by climate change – are the foundation upon which
the World Bank Group (WBG) is building its FY25-FY31 engagement. Underpinning these are other
challenges such as limited connectivity, which hampers growth, jobs, resilience, and access to services,
especially given the country’s diverse geography and topography. The three-tier federal system, the
cornerstone of Nepal’s post-conflict democracy, remains weak, reinforcing the persistent need to
build public institutions to deliver results.
3.        This Country Partnership Framework (CPF) outlines the strategic approach to the WBG's
proposed engagement in Nepal for FY25-31. The design and priorities of this CPF are informed by a
comprehensive analytical and evaluation program,4 a broad-based consultative process, and, critically,
the Government of Nepal's 16th Development Plan (FY24/25-28/29) which lays out its national
development priorities. The WBG’s engagement in Nepal is grounded in a rich tradition of partnership
with the government, development partners, the private sector, and civil society – and this new CPF
builds on that legacy. This CPF is unique in that the WBG has partnered with the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) to undertake a fully joint country strategy planning approach. As ADB and WBG together
account for around 70 percent of total official development assistance to Nepal – financing nearly
one-fourth of the central government’s capital expenditure5 – and have a strong track record of
cooperation in sectoral investment and policy dialogue, management from both institutions decided
to take this collaborative approach to the next level by jointly preparing both strategies. Consultations
with the government and other stakeholders at the federal, provincial, and local levels were held
jointly, and a fully coordinated framework for sectoral engagement has been developed.




1 Staff calculations.
2 Nepal Living Standards Survey IV (NLSS, 2024). In line with the Government’s definition, individuals engaged in subsistence agriculture

are excluded from the calculations.
3 Nepal Climate Risk Country Profile 2021: https://tinyurl.com/ycke3bpk and Ministry of Forests and Environment, Government of Nepal.

2019. Climate Change Scenarios for Nepal for National Adaptation Plan.
4 Including but not limited to the streamlined Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2024); Completion and Learning Review (CLR, 2025);

Country Economic Memorandum (CEM, 2025); Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR, 2022); NLSS, 2024; Public Expenditure
Financial Accountability Assessment (PEFA, 2024); Nepal Human Capital Review, 2025; and other strategic documents of the Government.
5 Based on Red Book data for fiscal year 2020/2021.




                                                                     I
4.       The CPF aims to balance the dual challenge of building institutions for sustained, lasting
development and delivering near-term impact and results. To do so, it introduces two principles for
prioritizing and programming WBG interventions.
  •   Principle 1: Exclusive Focus on Two Development Challenges. The two central development
      challenges – (i) job-creating growth and (ii) resilience to natural disasters – form the framework
      through which the WBG will structure the annual programming for its analytical, advisory, and
      lending work. An additional element is the cross-cutting issue of helping strengthen the public
      sector institutions to meet these challenges. Over the CPF period, the expectation is that the
      program will be almost fully reorientated to exclusively address these two challenges.
  •   Principle 2: Balancing Ambition for Transformation and the Need for Near-term Results. With
      some notable exceptions, Nepal has faced serious challenges in recent years in translating its
      externally financed projects and programs into tangible outcomes. While systemic problems in
      public service delivery are at the core of this, a critical lesson learned is the need to reduce
      complexity and risk in the bulk of the program. This CPF, therefore, envisions programming with
      greater differentiation between complex, ambitious, and high-risk/high-reward engagements
      (envisaged to make up about 20 percent of the program) and those that offer more immediate
      development dividends with less complexity and risk. The latter is expected to make up around
      80 percent of the program, characterized by simplicity of design, the use of existing successful
      programs and engagements, and phased and programmatic approaches that divide important
      issues into “bite sized” pieces within a framework for medium-term action, often leveraging
      partners, to ensure long-term impact and strategic relevance. The goal of this differentiation is
      to implement a program that addresses Nepal’s significant development challenges while also
      achieving short-term impact.
5.      Building on the two principles, the CPF will focus on three Outcomes fully aligned with the
WBG Corporate Scorecard: (i) More and Better Jobs; (ii) Connected Communities; and (iii) Green
Planet and Resilient Populations. As a cross-cutting theme, the CPF also intends to engage on public
sector institutions, governance, accountability, and effectiveness to help strengthen the public
sector’s capacity to absorb and utilize scarce resources effectively and deliver results for Nepal and its
people. In addition, One WBG solutions will be scaled up as the CPF aims to incentivize private sector
participation in priority areas.


                     II.      COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
2.1 Social and Political Context
6.       Ten years after a Comprehensive Peace Agreement ended the conflict in Nepal, the 2015
Constitution restructured the country from a unitary state under a monarchy into a federal
democratic republic. The 2015 Constitution introduced a three-tiered system of public administration
comprising a federal government, seven provincial governments, and 753 local governments. Nepal’s
political system is characterized by a multi-party democracy and, since the onset of democracy,
governments have been coalition-based. The country’s political situation is fluid due to shifting
alliances within successive coalition governments. Since the general elections of 2022, the
government has undergone four reshuffles, exacerbating challenges related to high staff turnover, the
consistency of policy implementation, and, overall, have hampered the ability of the public sector to
fully deliver – leading to growing discontent with the political status quo.
7.       The rollout of the federal public administration structures has begun in earnest, but serious
implementation challenges persist. Since the adoption of the 2015 Constitution and the country’s
transition to federalism, some progress has been made in establishing institutional structures,
adopting key legislation, and building the core blocks of public financial management. At the same

                                                    2
time, building a fully functioning federal system has been slow, with key legislative reforms still
pending and roles and responsibilities often not fully defined. Challenges persist in establishing a fiscal
system that fully aligns with the needs of the new federal structure. Additionally, broader political
challenges hinder the administrative and policy decisions required to help the system reach its full
potential. As of April 2, 2025, close to 45 bills, including the Civil Service Bill, remain pending for
discussion in Parliament. While local governments have been incrementally able to deliver on their
mandates, considerable challenges persist, particularly at the provincial level, due to legal ambiguities
and severe capacity constraints.
8.       Nepal’s unique geography and strategic location between China and India offer
opportunities for greater linkages to its neighbors and beyond but limit its economic flexibility amid
competing strategic interests. Greater integration in South Asia is seen as a path towards
development for many countries in the region, with Nepal as an important anchor for trade and
logistics. However, progress has been limited. While India has committed to buy 10,000 megawatts of
electricity from Nepal over 10 years – a major development in unlocking Nepal’s vast hydropower
potential – translating that broad commitment into bringing concrete investments to fruition has been
slow and challenging. Nepal faces a delicate balancing act in engaging with both neighbors.
9.      Nepal continues to face internal challenges in addressing critical social development needs.
While there has been notable progress in key health and education indicators in recent decades,
challenges remain. A child born in Nepal today is expected to reach only 50 percent of his or her
potential productivity. A fourth of children are stunted, a third of the working-age population lacks
primary education, and learning outcomes are poor, hampering future productivity. Young women
are increasingly out of the labor force, with 47 percent not in employment, education, or training
(NEET), more than double the rate of young men (22 percent). A major barrier to improving service
delivery is the fragmentation, and lack of clarity of roles and coordination between the three levels of
government. Many national programs, such as basic health services, school education, and temporary
employment programs, are managed at the local level, with minimal coordination between provincial
and federal agencies. This lack of coordination disproportionately affects poor, vulnerable, and
marginalized communities, who already face additional barriers in accessing essential services.
10.      Nepal is experiencing an early demographic transition and can significantly improve its
development trajectory by maximizing the potential of its demographic dividend. Reduced fertility
and mortality rates are producing smaller and healthier families, a youth cohort, more workers, and
fewer dependents. Consistent with the experience of most countries at similar levels of development,
Nepal is also going through a process of spatial population redistribution through urbanization, with
many Nepalis seeking opportunities in Kathmandu and secondary cities; a significant majority of
Nepalis now live in urban and peri-urban areas. Nepal’s demographic transition is uniquely intertwined
with significant migration abroad – around 2.1 million Nepalis (approximately 7.4 percent of the
population) currently live outside the country and recent data shows that the rate of migration is not
slowing.6 Migrants tend to be young, working-aged men and the challenge of creating quality jobs in
Nepal requires increasing and improving the distribution of opportunities, resources, and choices for
all, especially for women, youth, and vulnerable and marginalized people. Gender gaps in paid work
and unrecognized unpaid domestic and care work continue to negatively impact women’s quality of
life and productivity. Investing in health, education, skills, resilience, and an enabling work
environment could help create more productive employment, taking advantage of the once-in-a-
lifetime labor dividend.
2.2 Recent Economic Developments and Outlook
11.   Remittances contribute to economic resilience but have failed to ignite sustained stronger
economic growth. Over the past decade, real GDP grew at an average rate of 4.2 percent – a

6 Nepal Labour Migration Report 2022, Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security. https://tinyurl.com/2wdze5mk



                                                                 3
commendable performance given multiple external shocks, including the 2015 earthquakes and the
trade supply disruptions along the Indian border in 2015-16, but below that of regional peers.
Remittances, accounting for around one-quarter of GDP in FY24, have been the backbone of economic
growth, sustaining private consumption and the services sector. Remittances have not translated into
productivity increases or job creation. As a result, Nepal’s income level remains below that of peer
economies, and at its current trajectory, it would take nearly two decades to reach upper-middle
income status.
12.      Structural bottlenecks constrain domestic economic growth and job creation. Real exports
have stagnated for decades and failed to contribute meaningfully to economic growth, partly due to
an appreciating real exchange rate and domestic trade policies, including relatively high input tariffs
on intermediate goods and raw materials. Poor transport and logistics infrastructure has further
undermined export competitiveness. Manufacturing has steadily declined from an already low base,
and the tourism sector remains underdeveloped. Hydropower, which could enable stronger growth
and export earnings through affordable and green energy, has progressed too slowly to have a
significant impact. Inadequate infrastructure, regulatory hurdles, and digital literacy gaps continue to
hold back Nepal’s digitalization efforts. Other structural challenges include the lack of adequate
physical connectivity and weak governance. All these constraints have left Nepal unable to generate
sufficient domestic jobs or achieve higher economic growth.
13.       Nepal’s fiscal reliance on trade taxes has made public finances highly vulnerable to external
shocks, while inflation and external imbalances remain challenges. Average inflation has remained
high, only recently falling below Nepal Rastra Bank’s target of 6.5 percent in FY24, driven by declining
non-food and services inflation amid lower global oil prices. Nepal has also struggled with persistent
trade deficits, driven by the steady decline of nominal exports relative to GDP. Rather than broadening
the tax base, governments have taken the predictable route of relying on trade taxes and de-facto
tariffs, which accounted for nearly 45 percent of tax revenue over the past decade. This has not only
introduced an anti-export bias but has also made public finances highly sensitive to external shocks.
While the 2023 import restrictions temporarily reduced external deficits, they also led to a sharp drop
in trade tax revenue, pushing the fiscal deficit to a decade-high of nearly 6 percent of GDP.
14.      Prudent debt management has helped preserve fiscal space, mitigating risks despite rising
public debt. Nepal is one of the few developing economies at low risk of external and overall debt
distress under the Low-Income Country Debt Sustainability Framework. While public debt reached
42.7 percent of GDP in FY247, more than half came from concessional external financing, which offers
lower interest rates and longer maturities. This has kept debt servicing costs manageable and limited
liquidity pressures. Additionally, Nepal’s large foreign exchange reserves, bolstered by remittances,
provide an extra buffer against external shocks, reinforcing macroeconomic stability.
15.     Economic growth is expected to accelerate in the medium-term but remains dependent on
remittance-driven consumption and services. Real GDP growth is projected to rise to 4.5 percent in
FY25, close to historical averages. However, growth continues to be largely driven by private
consumption and services. Without targeted policies to unlock high-potential sectors such as tourism
and digital industries, Nepal risks continuing its pattern of slow structural transformation.
Furthermore, downside risks, including geopolitical tensions, economic slowdowns in partner
countries like India, and natural disasters, could weigh on future growth prospects. Nonetheless,
Nepal has demonstrated resilience in managing external shocks, and ongoing support through the


7 This is based on the numbers reported by the authorities and, as such, do not account for the negative balance of the Treasury Single

Account (TSA). Other numbers are as per the World Bank–IMF joint Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA).




                                                                    4
International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Extended Credit Facility and development partners will help
sustain near-term macroeconomic stability.
                                             Table 1. Key Macroeconomic Indicators
                                                       FY21      FY22      FY23     FY24e     FY25f     FY26f    FY27f     FY28f     FY29f
 Real economy (percentage change, unless
 otherwise stated)
 Nominal GDP, current prices (NPR, billions)           4,353     4,977    5,349     5,705     6,167     6,702    7,283     7,929     8,632
 Real GDP growth (at market prices)                     4.8       5.6      2.0       3.9       4.5       5.2      5.5       5.7       5.8
 Consumer prices (period average)                       3.6       6.3      7.7       5.4       5.0       4.5      4.3       4.2       4.0
 Fiscal sector (as percentage of GDP, unless
 otherwise indicated)
 Total revenue and grants                               23.3     22.9      19.3      19.4      19.2     19.4      19.7      19.9     20.1
 Expenditures                                           27.2     26.1      25.2      21.9      21.7     22.2      22.6      22.8     22.9
 Fiscal balance including grants                        -4.0     -3.2      -5.8      -2.5      -2.5     -2.8      -2.9      -2.9     -2.8
 Total public debt                                      39.9     40.5      42.9      42.7      43.2     43.3      43.4      43.4     43.3
 Balance of payments (as percentage of GDP,
 unless otherwise indicated)
 Current account balance                                -7.7     -12.5     -0.9       3.9       3.6      2.8       2.4       2.1       2.0
 Exports of goods and services                           5.1       6.7      7.0       7.6       8.7      9.5      10.0      10.1      10.3
 Imports of goods and services                          37.9      42.3     34.7      32.9      33.7     34.9      35.6      35.9      36.1
 Remittances (as percentage of GDP)                     22.1      20.2     23.2      25.3      24.9     24.5      24.3      24.1      24.0
 Gross official reserves (US$ billion, eop)            11753     9513     11709     15271     15571    15776     15853     15660     15364
 Gross official reserves (in months of concurrent
                                                        10.2      6.9      10.0      13.0      12.2     11.0       9.9      9.0       8.0
 imports)
 Memorandum items
 Population, million                                    29.5     29.7      29.7      29.7       ..        ..        ..       ..        ..
 GDP per capita, current prices (USD)                  1253      1386     1378      1446        ..        ..        ..       ..        ..
Sources: Nepal Rastra Bank, Ministry of Finance, National Statistics Office, and Financial Comptroller General Office for historical data;
and World Bank for projections and estimates.

2.3 Poverty and Shared Prosperity on a Livable Planet
16.      Poverty and inequality have substantially reduced in Nepal over the last decade, primarily
driven by remittances, although significant regional disparities in living standards remain. Living
standards have improved across the income distribution and in both urban and rural areas, with
minimal differences across male and female-headed households. Inequality has also gone down.
Utilizing the revised 2023 national poverty line, one-fifth of Nepal’s population lives in poverty, with
significant variations across Nepal’s seven provinces. Poverty is highest in Sudurpaschim (34.2
percent) and Karnali (26.7 percent), while Bagmati (12.6 percent) and Gandaki (11.9 percent) have the
lowest rates. Madhesh and Lumbini, with above-average poverty rates (22.5 and 24.4 percent) and
larger populations, have the largest number of poor.8 These regional disparities pose political and
social challenges, especially for the elderly and small children left behind due to migration. Targeted
policies are needed to protect these groups and promote rural-urban integration, ensuring that
disadvantaged areas are not solely reliant on transfers and remittances. With limited job opportunities
at home and higher wages abroad,9 emigration remains a preferred option for Nepalis across the
income distribution. Remittance-receiving households have increased over the past decade and per
capita remittances have risen for both poor and non-poor households. Rapidly growing emigration
has also indirectly impacted domestic wages in the non-agricultural sector. Rising wages in this sector
have been another key driver of the observed reduction in poverty between 2011 and 2023. With
rising remittances, increased demand for non-agricultural goods and services for non-farm labor has
also pushed up non-farm wages and shifted employment towards non-agricultural jobs.
17.     Nepal’s impressive progress faces significant risk from shocks, including health, economic,
and disaster shocks, compounded by the lack of targeted policy instruments for the poor. Structural
vulnerability to individuals falling back into poverty remains high due to a weak domestic labor market

8 NLSS, 2024.
9 Migrant workers earned three times more than domestic workers on average.



                                                                     5
and a focus on categorical social assistance programs that have limited reach among the poor and are
not easily scalable in response to shocks. Nepal also faces increased risks due to natural disasters and
a changing climate. Moreover, rural areas remain structurally reliant on agriculture, with 89 percent
of rural households engaged in crop production, which is particularly vulnerable to natural disasters
and climate hazards. The absence of a strong risk reduction and disaster risk management policy and
institutional framework – along with still developing social safety net framework and programs – limit
the capacity to mitigate and respond to such shocks.
18.      Nepal’s substantial reductions in poverty have yet to generate equitable opportunities for
women in the labor market. The country has made significant progress in secondary and higher
education enrollment and some aspects of maternal health. However, these improvements have not
led to equal participation in paid employment, with women’s labor force participation just at 24
percent compared to 53 percent for men. On average, women also earn 25 percent less than men,
although the pay gap is less severe in formal employment. Their limited participation is driven by many
factors and exacerbated by rigid social norms that shape educational and employment choices.
Adolescent fertility remains high, girls are considerably underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics, and women shoulder most of the unpaid domestic and caretaking
work. Further, many forms of gender-based violence and child marriage remain prevalent.10 In an
environment where remittances have pushed up both wages and reservation wages, women may find
it challenging to secure employment that offsets the costs of family care, further limiting their
participation in the labor market.
2.4 Main Development Challenges
19.      Key analyses and Nepal’s 16th Development Plan broadly converge on a set of intertwined
development challenges facing the country. The 2024 streamlined SCD (annex 3) concluded that the
six constraints identified in the 2018 SCD largely remain relevant, although progress on addressing
them has been uneven. These constraints relate to (i) weak public sector institutions cutting across all
sectors; (ii) job creation and private sector investment; (iii) equitable acquisition and use of human
capital; (iv) harnessing the potential of natural resources; (v) resilience to shocks; and (vi) getting more
from migration. The Country Economic Memorandum identifies four areas where challenges persist,
hindering growth and domestic job creation: (i) harnessing international migration for employment
and welfare; (ii) real exchange rates, trade policy, and exports; (iii) realizing the opportunities for
strategic sectors – like hydropower or tourism – to boost growth and create jobs; and (iv)
strengthening the digital sector.
20.      The 2022 Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) identifies ways for Nepal to
achieve its development objectives while transitioning to a more sustainable and inclusive
development path. It recommends seven policy packages that can help Nepal meet the adaptation
and resilience priorities identified in its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) and National
Adaptation Plan as well as its own 2045 net zero target: (i) taking an integrated approach to water,
agriculture, and forests; (ii) harnessing the hydropower opportunity and energy transition; (iii)
managing sustainable urbanization; (iv) strengthening low-carbon resilient connectivity; (v) scaling up
finance for resilience and low-carbon development; (vi) strengthening household and community
resilience; and (vii) strengthening governance for climate change and disaster risk management.
21.     Nepal’s development challenges converge with several global challenges identified by the
WBG and regional challenges such as air pollution. While Nepal applies global knowledge and lessons
from other countries to tackle these issues, its diverse landscape and susceptibility to environmental
challenges have fostered innovative local solutions in areas such as community forestry, biodiversity
protection, and energy access. For example, it is a global leader in building wildlife-friendly roads and

10 Police Headquarters Crime Investigation Department Women, Children and Senior Citizens Service Directorate. 2024. Annual Factsheet

on Gender-Based Violence Fiscal Year 2080/81 (Shrawan to Ashad) July/Aug 2023 to Jun/July 2024. Naxal, Kathmandu.

                                                                  6
has expanded its forest cover from 25 percent in the 1990s to 46 percent in 2022.11 Nepal’s expansion
of its hydropower capacity is central to its entry into regional power trade through the Sub-South
Asian Power Pool, which was initiated in 2022 when Nepal began trading power on India’s power
exchange.
22.     Nepal has faced increasing challenges in translating externally financed engagements into
tangible development results. The challenges in establishing a well-functioning public administration
system manifest themselves in the implementation challenges faced by WBG- and other Development
Partner-supported programs. The disbursement rates of WB operations have fallen significantly in
recent years, reflecting the government’s larger challenges in delivering development results
domestically. Only 63.5 percent of Nepal’s capital budget was executed in FY24. Several factors
contribute to this situation, including (a) the incomplete transformation of the former unitary system
of public administration into a three-tiered and decentralized one; (b) issues related to the
independence of the civil services; (c) governance issues, broadly, including corruption, which have
hampered the credibility of the public sector; and (d) a range of granular issues, from challenges with
control and oversight entities to widespread procedural issues in areas such as land acquisition, tree
cutting and civil works procurement, leading to risk aversion and bottlenecks in decision-making. And
the key challenges which underpin this CPF – building a platform for job creating growth and
addressing the resilience challenge – are profound and multifaceted; simple and short-term solutions
for such complex issues are not obvious, especially given the challenges of Nepal’s political and policy
making apparatus. Making real and lasting progress in these areas will be contingent on deep reforms
and a concerted effort across the political spectrum which has been largely elusive in recent years.


                            III.       WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK
3.1 Government’s Program and Medium-Term Strategy
23.      Nepal’s 16th Development Plan (FY24/25-28/29), approved in May 2024, is broad and
ambitious. Its primary goal is to achieve development, good governance, social justice, and prosperity
through the structural transformation of the economy. Key areas of structural transformation
identified include strengthened economic growth – also at the regional and local levels – enhanced
production and competitiveness, productive employment, sustainable social security, and ecological
sustainability and climate change. The Plan emphasizes building human capital, developing
infrastructure and connectivity, and sustainable and resilient urbanization. It also highlights the
importance of reducing poverty, increasing opportunities for women, an inclusive society, governance
reform, financial management, and capital formation.
3.2 Lessons Learned and Feedback from Consultations
24.     The implementation of the FY19-24 CPF provides important lessons (Box 1). The CPF focused
on three areas that are still relevant for Nepal: (i) public institutions; (ii) private sector-led jobs and
growth; and (iii) inclusion and resilience. The Completion and Learning Review (CLR, annex 2) rates
the development outcome for the FY19-24 period as “Moderately Satisfactory”. Eight of the twelve
CPF objectives were either achieved or mostly achieved, three were partially achieved, and one was
not achieved.




11 Forest Research Training Center, Nepal.



                                                      7
                Box 1: Key Lessons from the Completion and Learning Review (CLR) of the FY19-24 CPF
 The CLR identifies several key lessons that inform the design and implementation of this CPF. These lessons emphasize:
    •    Prioritization and selectivity: There is a need for greater prioritization and selectivity considering Nepal’s political
         economy challenges, federalism transition, and absorptive and implementation capacity, with a focus on long-
         term institutional strengthening.
    •    Focused results architecture: There is a need for a more realistic and focused results architecture for both public
         and private sector interventions, supported by investment in data generation capacity.
    •    Engagement with development partners: Sustained engagement with development partners is key to improving
         program effectiveness.
    •    One WBG: Scaling up the ‘One WBG’ approach, including IFC’s and MIGA’s programs, requires stronger
         cooperation, flexibility, and innovative solutions.
 These lessons are also consistent with recommendations from ADB’s Country Assistance Program Review (2024), including
 the focus on improving development effectiveness and private sector development.


25.     Stakeholder consultations were carried out jointly with the ADB at federal, provincial, and
local levels of government and with representatives from the private sector, civil society, and
development partners. An online survey targeted youth aged 18 to 35. A key message from the
consultations was the need to strengthen provincial and local level authorities’ ability to plan and
implement programs. Other messages emphasized the lack of economic opportunities and jobs for
youth, which drives internal migration to the capital and international migration to India and other
countries. The consultations also highlighted the need to enhance private sector engagement,
leverage resources, and focus on agriculture productivity and commercialization. A 2024 Country
Opinion Survey highlighted that the WBG is considered one of the most trusted institutions in Nepal.
Stakeholders urged the WBG to ensure effectiveness through more accountability and transparency
in the use of funds, and by considering the local context when developing policies and programs.
Additionally, the WBG was encouraged to collaborate more with provincial and local governments and
the private sector.
26.      The Independent Evaluation Group’s (IEG) analysis of the WBG’s support to Nepal between
FY14-FY23 reported success in several areas but highlighted challenges in building institutions and
reforming policies. The 2024 Country Program Evaluation (CPE) noted achievements in areas such as
infrastructure and disaster reconstruction – sectors largely free of political contention or where
government programs preexisted. Evaluating WBG support for Nepal’s federalism transition, private
sector development and job creation, and climate and disaster resilience, the CPE recommends a focus
on (i) promoting counterpart capacity and fostering coalitions for change among counterparts,
stakeholders, and development partners; (ii) improving program implementation through enhanced
technical support, proactive project restructuring, and more candid results monitoring; and (iii)
considering political economy challenges during the program design and implementation stages, with
a stronger focus on improving citizen engagement and strengthening subnational institutions.
27.     This CPF reflects lessons from past engagements, IEG’s evaluation, and stakeholder
consultations. A simpler results framework fully aligns with the Corporate Scorecard, and selectivity
and prioritization are embodied in the CPF’s focus on just two development challenges and on
balancing ambition for transformation with the need for near-term results. ‘Institutions’ is identified
as a cross-cutting theme to help strengthen public sector capacity to absorb and effectively utilize
scarce resources and address implementation bottlenecks. Lessons learned are also reflected in both
the joint strategy process with ADB and the identification of key sectors for One WBG engagement.
3.3 Overall Approach and Selectivity Going Forward
28.     The CPF will span a seven-year cycle, with the first five coinciding with Nepal’s 16th
Development Plan. Although the main challenges remain broadly the same as in the previous CPF,
this CPF incorporates several shifts based on the WBG evolution and lessons learned. It builds on two
principles: an exclusive focus on two development challenges – job-creating growth and resilience to

                                                               8
natural disasters (Principle 1) and balancing ambition for transformation and the need for near-term
results (Principle 2). The CPF uses the three standard selectivity criteria: (i) WBG Mission to end
extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity on a livable planet; (ii) Country development goals and
demand; and (iii) WBG Capacity and Competence (Figure 1).
                Figure 1: Selectivity Criteria and CPF Principles: What and How




Selectivity Criteria 1: WBG Mission in the Context of Nepal’s Development Challenges
29.     The deep analytical work conducted in recent years, along with routine WBG analytical work
to understand the dynamics of the economy and society in Nepal, have helped to hone a focus on
the two central challenges at the heart of Nepal’s development pathway: (a) lack of sustainable, and
job-creating growth; and (b) Nepal’s extreme exposure to natural disasters, including those caused by
and exacerbated by climate change; as well as the foundational and cross-cutting issue of the public
sector’s weak capacity to deliver results. These are fully consistent with the findings of the SCD and
other analytical underpinnings of the WBG’s engagement in Nepal.
Selectivity Criteria 2: Nepal’s Development Goals and Client Demand
30.       The proposed CPF Outcomes align with Nepal’s 16th Plan and its commitment to
environmental sustainability and social inclusion, and priorities identified during CPF consultations.
Binding constraints include the government’s absorptive and implementation capacity, as well as
demand. Priority will be given to areas with strong political will for reform, absorptive capacity, or
proactive efforts to address bottlenecks. Further selectivity will be based on the need to balance
ambition for transformation with near-term results, weighing trade-offs between complex, high-
risk/high-reward engagements and more immediate, achievable interventions grounded in a realistic
assessment of constraints. This will ensure that while supporting Nepal’s long-term goals remains
critical, efforts are directed toward areas where tangible progress can be made within the CPF period.
Additionally, commitment to providing a budget and making funds available at the level of
government responsible for implementation will also be important.
31.      The CPF will remain flexible to adapt to factors, including demand and needs, that may
change during the strategy period. Given the relatively limited IDA program compared to Nepal’s
extensive development needs and successive governments’ views that borrowing, no matter how
concessional, should be focused on infrastructure and growth-related operations, the WBG will use
the range of instruments at its disposal to maintain a robust engagement in complementary sectors.
This includes advisory and analytical work and partner-supported activities financed through grants
and is planned to cover areas like environmental management, human capital development, and
public sector capacity building and institutional strengthening. In the immediate term, fewer new IDA-


                                                    9
financed operations in health and education are likely. However, as the broader development aid
landscape evolves, the WB will adjust its program to both complement partners with growing
programs and help fill the gaps left by those adjusting their priorities and/or scope of support. The WB
will remain engaged in areas critical to the jobs and skills agenda, complementing partners’
engagements in developing foundational skills and labor market-relevant skills for young people. As
such, engagement will pivot to largely focus on the development of a well-functioning safety net (if
there is demand), which has been identified as central to the country’s resilience agenda.
Selectivity Criteria 3: WBG Capacity and Competence
32.      The WBG’s strengths lie in leveraging financing, guarantees, knowledge, and expertise
across the WB, IFC, and MIGA, as well as in enabling and mobilizing private capital. The CPF proposes
a strengthened emphasis on One WBG solutions, scaling up engagement, programmatic approaches,
and leveraging knowledge. Considering the limitations in Nepal’s legal framework and policies, the
WBG’s engagement in the early years of this CPF will likely focus on reforms and investment needed
for job-creating growth, especially related to the investment climate for domestic and foreign private
sector development. Depending on success in this area, IFC and MIGA will step up their engagements
to support the private sector. Greater use will also be made of innovative financial instruments,
including guarantees through the WBG Guarantee Platform and capital market risk transfer
instruments (like Catastrophe Bonds and international reinsurance products), which will help the
program go beyond the relatively limited IDA financing available to mobilize private capital.
33.      The WBG’s partnership with the ADB lies at the heart of the CPF. Beyond this, convening
and coordination with the development partner community in Nepal has been central to the WBG’s
ability to identify critical reforms and development priorities, and these efforts will be further
strengthened. Close partnership with the ADB is seen as central to improving program effectiveness
and increasing scale and replicability. The WBG and ADB have a strong track record of collaboration,
including joint and parallel financing in areas such as education, gender, roads, water, and cross-
financing the upcoming Upper Arun and Dudhkoshi Storage Hydroelectric Projects. Greater
collaboration through the joint strategic approach with ADB will increasingly drive development
during the CPF period towards jointly identified objectives and results in selected areas, considering
each organization’s comparative advantage. Early in the CPF period, the WBG and ADB are planning a
joint policy-based engagement in the areas of business environment, jobs, and growth. Other areas
include improving capital expenditure and public financial management. In some sectors, support will
be complementary – for example, the development of the East-West Highway (a significant strategic
road network) and upgrading provincial/local road networks. In addition, in the immediate term, while
there is a large need for energy transmission infrastructure and investment, ADB and other partners
are currently funding significant programs in this space.
34.     Based on lessons from the previous strategy and the program’s pivot to respond to COVID-
19, the CPF will dynamically adapt the program through the business planning process and a
Performance and Learning Review. This could include redirecting the program as priorities shift away
from areas of low absorptive capacity, low demand, or where other financing has been secured and
WBG support is no longer needed. In a changing country context, this will allow the WBG to focus on
emerging opportunities where its support is best suited to help the government achieve scale and
replicability. The program also needs to be flexible to assist the government in responding to shocks,
including natural disasters and disease outbreaks.
3.4 Proposed CPF Program
35.     The CPF’s overall goal is to contribute to the WBG’s mission to end extreme poverty and
boost shared prosperity on a livable planet and support Nepal in implementing its 16th Plan in select
areas. The CPF identifies three Outcomes that correspond to the two identified development
challenges: job-creating growth and the need for greater resilience to natural disasters, including

                                                  10
those caused, or exacerbated, by climate change. Within the framework of these development
challenges, the WBG will measure its impact through the CPF Outcomes selected as proxies for the
program: More and Better Jobs; Connected Communities; and Green Planet and Resilient Populations
(Figure 2). Connectivity is essential for both services and resilience, but it is also a crucial pre-condition
for job-creating growth. Given that it is a sizeable part of the WBG’s program in Nepal, it has a
dedicated Outcome in the CPF framework. The CPF also identifies strengthened public sector
institutions, governance, accountability, and effectiveness as a cross-cutting theme and intermediate
step to help the public sector deliver results. While the Outcomes and the selected indicators do not
encompass all activities supported by the WBG throughout the 7-year CPF period, they represent the
majority of the program, with measurable metrics to track results.
                         Figure 2: CPF Outcomes, Indicators, and Cross-cutting Theme




CPF Outcome 1: More and Better Jobs
36.     This Outcome supports key building blocks for job-creating and sustainable growth to create
more and better jobs. These include (i) building a better and more investment friendly business
environment with enabling reforms for private sector-driven growth and investment; (ii) supporting
urban centers and critical job-creating sectors like tourism; and (iii) improving the quality of education
and skills for the labor market. It will be measured by the following indicators from the Corporate
Scorecard:
 Indicator 1: Waged employment share of working age population, of which (%) are women (client context indicator)
 Indicator 2: Private investment as a percentage of GDP (client context indicator)
 Indicator 3: Millions of students supported with better education
 Indicator 4: Millions of people and businesses using financial services, of which (%) are women

Better Business Environment for Private Sector Growth and Investment
37.      Major policy reforms and investments are needed to shift the economy toward dynamic
growth. Nepal’s current growth model, heavily reliant on remittances and consumption, has proven
resilient but is insufficient to meet the country’s ambitious development targets. On the supply side,
the quality of skills is a binding constraint for productivity, a challenge exacerbated by outward
migration which makes it harder for firms to retain skilled professionals and offer competitive
opportunities. High turnover leads to increased training costs and disruptions in productivity, further
deepening the challenges of workforce stability and economic competitiveness. Low levels of foreign
direct investment (FDI) hinder the transfer of managerial know-how and the diffusion of the latest
technologies, which are critical drivers of improved firm performance. At the firm level, low
productivity stems from considerable factor market and regulatory constraints, particularly those that
facilitate domestic competition between firms, the entry of productive firms, and the exit of less
productive ones. Nepal’s cities, where the bulk of total factor productivity-driving investments will

                                                         11
take place, have potential but lack a conducive environment for investment and job creation and
require substantial investments in livability and competitiveness to attract the employment-creating
industries Nepal aspires to have, as well as institutional strengthening to deliver transparent and
efficient services. Women’s labor force participation in Nepal is low by international standards, with
a large gender gap in skilled employment, unpaid labor, wage gaps, unequal access to opportunities,
and restrictive social norms. Increasing female labor participation and productivity would require
reducing household-work tradeoffs and ensuring equal access to assets.
38.      The WBG intends to support policy reform, including monetary and trade policy, to
promote competitiveness, FDI, and productivity growth. In the immediate term, the centerpiece of
the WBG’s focus on job creating growth is likely to be a Development Policy Credit (DPC) to address
key business environment constraints to unlock private investment. This flagship engagement is likely
to be prepared jointly with ADB under the Full Mutual Reliance Framework and with a single matrix
for policy reform. The engagement would embody the One WBG approach, with a team of staff from
IFC, WB, and ADB. Support will largely focus on challenges in the investment and enterprise landscape,
attracting FDI, and the broader business environment challenges that limit investment and firm
creation and expansion, including binding constraints on micro, small, and medium enterprise (MSME)
growth and access to finance. The WBG also plans to focus on strengthening the investment climate
for domestic and foreign investment and enhancing access to finance for underserved sectors,
particularly those with job creation potential. This includes increasing access to finance for women,
youth, and marginalized populations. These initiatives will be complemented by guarantees available
under the WBG Guarantee Platform to encourage FDI and support the private sector, potentially with
IDA Private Sector Window (PSW) resources. Other efforts will aim to leverage policy reforms to meet
MSMEs’ short-term capital needs, infrastructure financing, and business support services.
39.      IFC will focus on the diversification of financing opportunities to expand financial inclusion.
Through advisory and upstream interventions, improving Nepal’s financial infrastructure will be
prioritized, including credit reporting, secured lending (including de-risking instruments such as partial
credit guarantees and secured transaction registries), and payment systems. With the greater focus
on job creation and growth — especially in critical sectors such as tourism and digital – a focused effort
to identify opportunities and finance these sectors, including through Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
modalities, will characterize joint IFC, MIGA, and WB efforts. To support private capital mobilization
by domestic and international investors, the WBG will work with the government to support reforms
like those supporting hybrid financing instruments/structures, including mezzanine financing. Current
regulations only allow pure debt or equity investments or both. Reforms that broaden the product
mix would allow firms with different risk profiles to secure investments.
Support to Urban Centers and Tourism as Growth Engines
40.      With urban areas increasingly concentrating people, assets, and opportunities, a renewed
focus on improving the competitiveness of cities – both in the Kathmandu Valley and, equally
importantly, in secondary cities – is integral to Nepal’s medium-term growth and jobs challenge.
With a population of four million, the Kathmandu Valley is the largest urban agglomeration in Nepal
and one of the fastest-growing metropolitan regions in South Asia. It accounts for about one-third of
the country’s urban population and sustains a rapid pace of population growth. The Kathmandu Valley
is also a major destination for internal migration due to its economic opportunities. If managed
properly, growth in the Valley can generate productivity gains, economic opportunities, and rising
incomes for the entire country. However, it suffers from uncontrolled growth, poor or nonexistent
planning, traffic congestion, and significant environmental degradation. Housing is often substandard
(and unsafe, given the area’s high exposure to seismic risk), and major investments are needed in basic
services like water supply, sewage and wastewater treatment, urban transport, and drainage. This
rapid and unplanned growth has led to a situation where fairly urgent measures are needed to create
a livable, competitive urban environment that not only provides a high quality of life to the Valley’s

                                                   12
inhabitants but leverages Kathmandu’s assets as a tourist and investment destination. Kathmandu’s
relatively mild climate – especially compared to other cities in the region – offers a natural competitive
advantage that could be leveraged as heat stress and rising temperatures intensify across the region
due to climate change. Beyond Kathmandu, a similar story characterizes medium-sized cities like
Pokhara, Biratnagar, Janakpur, and the municipalities that make up greater Lumbini – rapid population
growth and a dynamic of unplanned urban expansion, underinvestment in critical infrastructure for
livability like water and sanitation and urban transport, and the need for better urban governance and
institutions.
41.     Under this CPF, the WBG plans to put a greater emphasis on Nepal’s transition to a greener,
inclusive, and more resilient model of urban development in both the Kathmandu Valley and in
medium-sized and secondary cities, provided there is demand and buy-in from the various
government actors and institutions involved. Support would likely include integrated urban planning
and regeneration and, critically, investing in resilient infrastructure such as urban transport, water
supply, and sanitation.
42.      Tourism remains relatively underdeveloped in Nepal, despite the country’s impressive
natural and cultural assets, but holds potential as a driver of private sector-led growth and jobs.
Some areas, like the greater Katmandu Valley and Everest, are in a better position to develop this
potential. However, other areas with significant tourism potential often lack adequate infrastructure,
including regional connectivity and facilities, hampering efforts to attract visitors. Nepal ranks 105 of
119 countries in the Travel and Tourism Development Index 2024, with infrastructure and services
identified as the primary constraints for tourism take-off.12 Among these areas lacking infrastructure
and facilities, Lumbini and Gandaki stand out for their numerous cultural sites, natural beauty, and
viability to attract private investment in the medium term. However, both would require major
investments to realize this potential. For example, Lumbini is part of the Buddhist circuit, tracing the
historical Buddha’s journey across India and Nepal. To capitalize on this potential, the government
had developed a National Tourism Strategic Plan in 2016 that is still pending implementation.
43.      In addition to supporting connectivity, adopting a regional perspective, the WBG plans to
explore partnering with the private sector to support the sustainable development and growth of
Nepal’s tourism sector in way which creates employment opportunities. International experience
shows that tourism can be an important sector for employing women, who currently comprise only
20 percent of Nepal's tourism workforce and are largely confined to lower-level positions. Enhancing
employment opportunities and enhancing Nepal’s overall tourism offer requires a multifaceted
approach to engage local governments, the private sector, and communities. The WBG envisages a
multiphase programmatic engagement in the tourism sector, comprising multiple operational and
analytical engagements over time, that would support a comprehensive tourism strategy. These
activities would potentially include operational efforts to enhance connectivity, provide support for
private sector investment in tourism, finance critical investments in cultural assets and the resilience
of existing infrastructure, enhance conservation of protected areas, and support critical policy
interventions to ensure that Nepal’s tourism sector can benefit from greater private sector dynamism
and investment, including from MSMEs and foreign investors.
Quality of Education and Skills for the Labor Market
44.     While Nepal is at an early stage of its demographic transition, it utilizes less than 20 percent
of its human potential due to weak education and health and limited employability and
connectivity, especially among its poorest and most disadvantaged.13 Increasing the
competitiveness, productivity, and employability of the Nepali labor force, at home and abroad, will
be a key element of leveraging Nepal’s demographic dividend. Investing in better health and skills

12 World Economic Forum, 2024.
13 Nepal Human Capital Review, 2025.



                                                   13
development is especially relevant for women and youth. At 35 percent, the share of youth not in
employment, education, or training in Nepal is the highest in South Asia, except for Afghanistan. For
female youth, the share is nearly 47 percent. The lack of skills constrains the employability of people
and the job creation potential of firms. Enhancing women's access to high-growth sectors and
employment opportunities requires strengthening school-to-work transitions and equipping girls and
women with relevant skills and networks. Priorities include expanding education and training in digital
literacy and science, technology, engineering, and mathematics while revitalizing the Technical and
Vocational Education and Training sector to upskill women for the evolving job market.
45.       During the first half of the CPF period, the WB plans to continue supporting improved quality
of education through an ongoing innovative sector-wide approach that anchors major investments
from several development partners, including ADB. The CPF envisages further engagement in the
sector through a range of analytic, advisory, and investment tools, including potentially for quality of
education and research and innovation. In the latter part of the CPF period, support is likely to
gradually shift towards skills development for the labor market. Programmatic support is planned to
enhance the development of skills essential for navigating a changing world of work, productive
livelihoods, and local and global employment. The WB and ADB aim to work closely to articulate a
comprehensive skills development agenda and requisite financing. To boost the efficiency and
productivity of working populations, including informal workers, youth, and women, efforts will likely
focus on strengthening foundational skills, digital skills, and soft skills such as teamwork and
collaboration. Additionally, the WBG will aim to foster partnerships with industries to implement and
scale up apprenticeships and on-the-job training, targeting crucial skills demanded by employers. This
is likely to be complemented by continued support for a coherent employment delivery system at the
federal and local levels, providing employment services to workers and employers. Improving the
impact of efforts in the sector will require action and capacity at all three tiers of government,
including through policy and advisory work to continue clarifying roles and responsibilities. An
important agenda will be enhancing the capacity and accountability of local governments and schools
in delivering education services.
CPF Outcome 2: Connected Communities
46.      Connectivity, including regional connectivity, is crucial for growth, jobs, resilience, and
services, especially considering Nepal’s geography and topography. Support under this Outcome
focuses on: (i) roads, bridges, and transportation systems; (ii) energy access and reliability; and (iii)
digital connectivity and services. WBG engagement under this Outcome will be measured by the
following indicators from the Corporate Scorecard:
 Indicator 1: Millions of people that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services
 Indicator 2: Millions of people provided with access to electricity
 Indicator 3: Millions of people using digitally enabled services

Transport Infrastructure
47.      Increased access to climate-resilient infrastructure and efficient services, including
transport connectivity and green mobility, is paramount to job creation and facilitating private
sector activity, tourism, productivity, and growth in Nepal. Enhanced regional, national, provincial,
and local connectivity ensures that businesses can access markets more effectively, local communities
can better access economic opportunities, and tourists are encouraged by safe and reliable access to
cultural and natural destinations. International experience demonstrates that investments in safe and
reliable infrastructure and transportation services can also be critical to enhancing women’s human
capital, mobility, and labor force participation – all important challenges in Nepal. Investments in
cross-border corridors can enhance regional trade and reduce costs. Moreover, investing in
connectivity would also directly create construction, maintenance, and service sector jobs.


                                                            14
48.     Through ongoing and new investment lending, the WB plans to focus on national, provincial,
and local connectivity. Resilient roads, bridges, and transportation systems will be designed to
withstand natural disasters, ensuring continued functionality, even in adverse conditions. As the two
major development partners in the sector, with combined investments in transport infrastructure
worth approximately US$1.7 billion, the WB and ADB are closely coordinating their portfolios to
achieve maximum developmental impact and avoid redundancies. They will also seek to enhance their
sectoral collaboration. In addition to connecting people to sustainable transport infrastructure and
services, engagements are also designed to increase the number of people with enhanced resilience
to climate risk.
49.      A One-WBG approach is instrumental in delivering transformative transport solutions in
Nepal. With a focus on de-risking transport development and operation, synergy among the WB, IFC,
and MIGA through the WBG Guarantee Platform will harness their collective expertise and resources.
The WB has a large and ongoing program to provide financing and create a conducive regulatory
environment for sustainable and impactful transport in Nepal. This engagement is expected to remain
in place for the bulk of the CPF period. A frontier area where the WBG has had limited presence but is
likely to expand is urban transport, linked to the broader urban development and competitiveness
agenda. Here there is a significant need to further develop transparent regulatory frameworks and
the kind of well-organized and efficient urban transport systems that have transformed urban
landscapes in a number of developing countries, and which could, in principle, leverage PPPs, including
attracting private investment and commercial financing. IFC will aim to mobilize private investments
and commercial financing for transport projects with WB support in addressing viability gaps and
enhancing project bankability for private sector participation, as well as de-risking through WBG
Guarantee Platform instruments. By engaging with local and international private investors, IFC aims
to attract the necessary capital for the development and operation of sustainable transportation
systems in electric mobility, cable cars, and logistics and warehousing. There will be an emphasis on
innovative financing solutions, including private capital mobilization and the use of concessional
finance products that blend public and private funds to optimize project finance. MIGA can offer
political risk insurance to foster confidence for foreign private investments in transport, potentially
with IDA PSW involvement, while the WBG Guarantee Platform can leverage its instruments to
support investment in the sector.
Increased Energy Access and Reliability
50.     Greater energy connectivity, reliability of supply, and its resilience are important to ensure
that businesses can thrive and contribute to local communities’ better access to economic
opportunities and services. Nepal’s abundant hydropower resources, combined with its geographic
location, have the potential to transform its economy and shape long-term economic development by
providing low-carbon energy for domestic use and export. Despite its potential, hydropower remains
vastly underutilized. By attracting private sector investments and fostering innovation in the
renewable energy sector, Nepal can build a more sustainable, resilient, inclusive, and diversified
economy, promoting both environmental health and green investments. The potential for low-cost,
low-carbon hydropower is one of Nepal’s few competitive advantages given its landlocked geography.
The greater development of these abundant resources would do more than provide revenue from
energy export; it could help provide the foundation for a broader transformation of the economy,
particularly in the digital and tourism sectors.
51.      The WBG is planning to support renewable energy to enhance reliable energy access and
regional energy trade through the development of selected large-scale hydropower plants, designed
to withstand natural disasters and remain functional in adverse conditions. Taking advantage of
Nepal’s energy resources and fully developing them requires investment throughout the energy value
chain – from generation to transmission to distribution – exceeding the capacity of any single financier.
In the immediate term, the WBG will likely continue to support transformative investments in

                                                   15
generation (complementing ongoing work to support distribution). However, given the uncertainties
and long gestation periods associated with large generation projects, flexibility is needed to support
the sector’s investment needs. The WBG’s ongoing program represents major commitments to
engage in the development of hydropower in Nepal. This includes ongoing support for Upper Trishuli
1 – which received a MIGA guarantee, as well as financing from the WB, IFC, ADB, and other
International Financial Institutions – and the proposed Upper Arun and Dudhkoshi Storage
Hydroelectric Projects. Supported by upstream policy reforms, a continued focus on promoting private
participation in hydropower generation, transmission, distribution, and regional power trade is critical
to Nepal’s climate change mitigation efforts and is central to the government’s approach. WBG
Guarantee Platform instruments could also facilitate increased private sector engagement in these
areas. In addition to hydropower, other renewables will remain central to WBG engagement. MIGA
and IFC will aim to utilize the IDA PSW for eligible projects to mitigate risk as required. Efforts will also
be made to institutionalize a Public-Private Dialogue Platform on energy.
Digital Connectivity and Services
52.      Broadened and deepened digital development, including broadband connectivity and
enhanced digital government services, are crucial for growth, responsive governance, and effective
citizen-focused service delivery. A focus on expanding reliable and high-speed broadband
connectivity across the country, especially in rural and underserved areas, will be the cornerstone of
the WBG’s digital development plan for Nepal. Ensuring universal access to affordable broadband
requires investments from various sources and significant mobilization of private capital. Another
focus will be to increase access to digital services, and the WBG would support the efforts of the
government to better utilize digital technologies in the provision of public services, an area where
there has been little progress in Nepal compared to peer and neighboring countries. The WB’s
engagement in this area – which continues to be undertaken in close coordination with development
partners – remains fully aligned with the Global Challenge Program on Accelerating Digitalization.
53.      The WBG is advising the government on policy reforms to improve the enabling
environment for investments in broadband infrastructure while also strengthening institutions to
ensure competitive and inclusive markets. This focuses on regulatory changes to simplify the licensing
process, encourage competition, and reduce the costs of deploying broadband infrastructure through
initiatives such as infrastructure sharing. IFC is evaluating possible investment opportunities to expand
broadband networks beyond the current areas to those that are traditionally underserved. These can
potentially be supported by WBG Guarantee Platform instruments. The WB and IFC are also working
to promote investment in Nepal’s data hosting capabilities to modernize the country's data
infrastructure to encourage private firms to invest in data center operations. IFC is exploring
investment opportunities in this sector, potentially supported by Guarantee Platform instruments.
The collaboration also includes developing a policy framework that enables PPPs to open the market
to private operators, supporting innovation in cloud services. Planned investments in digital
government enablers and services will improve access to digital services for all people and businesses.
To develop the digital innovation ecosystem, the WB and IFC are aligning efforts to address the talent
gap as Nepal faces a shortage of skilled IT professionals. A One WBG joint action plan will support the
coordination of these efforts toward maximizing finance for development.
CPF Outcome 3: Green Planet and Resilient Populations
54.      As Nepal is prone to natural disasters, particularly those caused by, or whose impacts are
exacerbated by, climate change, this Outcome will support strengthening resilience to these shocks,
reducing risks, and preparing for crises. It focuses on: (i) strengthening the institutional framework
for crisis and disaster preparedness at all levels of government; (ii) investing in risk reduction in the
built environment; (iii) strengthening household and community resilience through the development
of adaptive safety nets and resilience of the public service delivery system, and (iv) supporting more


                                                     16
sustainable use of land and natural resources, including transformation of rural economies towards
higher value-added agriculture. Progress in this area will be measured by the following indicators from
the Corporate Scorecard:
 Indicator 1: Millions of people with enhanced resilience to climate risk
 Indicator 2: Percentage of people exposed to hazardous air quality (client context indicator)

Strengthening the Institutional Framework for Crisis and Disaster Preparedness and Investing in Risk
Reduction in the Built Environment
55.      Increased preparedness to handle shocks is crucial as Nepal faces recurrent natural disasters
such as earthquakes, floods (including from glacier lake outbursts), droughts, heat waves, forest
fires, and landslides. Compounding these inherent risks is Nepal’s limited financial and other capacity
to reduce, prepare for, respond to, and manage these events – which have a disproportionate impact
on the most vulnerable, as well as women and girls. Risk reduction will be central to the WBG
approach, and this requires investment and policy reform across the whole of the economy; assets
like roads, bridges, irrigation systems, and other infrastructure investments are exposed to risk in
urban and rural areas of the country. The WB estimates that every US$1 investment in risk reduction
could save US$4 of expenditure in reconstruction or remediation. Therefore, a “build better before”
approach, instead of having to “build back better”, will be central to the WBG’s engagement.
56.       Building on its previous substantial engagement, including support for reconstruction after
the 2015 earthquake, the WBG is well positioned to increase its support for climate and disaster-
related risk preparedness. During the CPF period, the WB aims to focus on supporting the
strengthening of the policy and institutional framework and its implementation capacity and making
critical investments for crisis and disaster preparedness and response. The program is likely to include
engagements in risk reduction (for example, in the safe schools’ space), preparedness (for early
warning systems including hydrometeorological systems, recognizing the importance of
transboundary cooperation), and further support on disaster risk finance to help Nepal build a
modern, layered approach to managing the financial impacts of disasters. This is likely to include
exploring sovereign risk transfer instruments (including through the capital markets).
57.      IFC will continue to support the greening and increased resilience of Nepal’s financial sector
through advisory services and/or investments for financial institutions and regulators. This could
entail credit lines for banks to on-lend for green initiatives, coupled with advisory services to the same
banks to identify green assets and upgrade management information systems to accurately record
pertinent information on their green portfolios. Other inventions could include supporting financial
intermediaries to issue green bonds, partial credit guarantees, uptake in climate risk insurance
products, and the adoption of integrated risk management frameworks that help banks comply with
disclosure standards. WBG Guarantee Platform instruments could support such initiatives.
Strengthen Household and Community Resilience through the Development of Adaptive Safety Nets
58.      Shock-responsive social protection (SRSP) programs and systems can improve household
resilience to shocks before, during, and after disasters, helping maintain livelihoods and reducing
instances of falling back into poverty. Despite high levels of vulnerability, only a third of Nepal’s
population and only about half of the poorest households are covered by social protection programs.
Existing programs are not shock-responsive, and delivery systems are fragmented and nascent, in part
because 82 percent of workers are in the informal sector with limited access to safety nets.
59.     Contingent on client demand, the WB plans to expand its ongoing programmatic support to
strengthen social protection delivery systems and support the implementation of shock-responsive
social protection standards by leveraging digital solutions, an area where it has a comparative
advantage. Support would potentially include the development of an integrated social protection
system, including an integrated social registry with demographic and socio-economic data of all

                                                            17
households which can be used to identify beneficiaries for regular social protection programs as well
as disaster relief. Support would aim to reorient social protection towards promoting household
resilience and strengthening the institutional arrangements for more coherent social protection
policies and delivery.
Support more Sustainable Use of Land and Natural Resources and Transformation of the Rural
Economies towards Higher Value-added Agriculture
60.     Managing the rural space as an integrated system and increased adoption of sustainable
natural resource management can generate multiple benefits for people, prosperity, and the planet.
Agriculture and livestock contribute to over 21 percent of Nepal’s GDP and agriculture employs 61
percent14 of the working population. It is also the largest employer of return migrants. A high
percentage of women are engaged in unpaid low productivity work in agriculture and informal jobs,
highlighting the need for structural labor transitions for young women to high productivity and paid
jobs. Better management and use of resources coupled with sustainable development of value chains
and local enterprises in agriculture and forestry – recognizing the importance of regional cooperation
– can together increase growth, expand jobs, build resilience, and protect livelihoods, while also
helping protect vulnerable infrastructure.
61.     The WBG aims to harness opportunities to improve livelihoods associated with sustainable
use of agricultural land and other natural capital such as forests and water, in concert with other
development partners, particularly ADB. Such support would require an integrated systems approach
to build on ongoing engagements. Elements could include the expansion of year-round irrigated
agriculture, local enterprise development, and shifting agricultural expenditures from subsidies to
public goods provision. Support to improve agricultural practices, develop more resilient landscapes,
and invest in a systemic animal health system – key for achieving sustainable food systems – will be
considered over the course of the CPF, although no immediate investments are planned. IFC, through
advisory services and investments in both real and financial sector clients, will aim to support
increased productivity and sustainability in agribusiness. Private sector investments could be
supported by WBG Guarantee Platform instruments. Given the program’s focus on jobs and growth,
the WB is likely to focus any future engagement in the forestry space in areas where economic
development is central to harnessing the economic potential of forests. Given the selectivity
embedded in the CPF, pure conservation efforts would likely not be part of the WB’s IDA-funded
program during the CPF period. Engagements will aim to increase the number of people with
enhanced resilience to climate risk but are also designed to contribute to more and better jobs under
Outcome 1.
62.       Nepal ranks second globally for the share of population exposed to hazardous air pollution.
The Indo-Gangetic Plains and Himalayan Foothills region, which Nepal shares with Bangladesh, India,
and Pakistan, has the world’s worst air pollution. Considering the need for transboundary,
multisectoral, and coordinated solutions to address this issue, a series of regional and national
interventions are planned, aiming to strengthen air quality governance and reduce air pollution in
critical sectors. The Series of Projects responds to evidence showing that coordinated, airshed-wide
action is the cheapest, fastest, and most effective way to achieve cleaner air for residents in this sub-
region. As part of this broader program, programmatic support to Nepal for clean air is planned, in
partnership with ADB and other development partners, to address some of the main sources of
pollution in Nepal.
Cross-cutting theme: Strengthening public sector institutions, accountability, and effectiveness
63.     Strengthening public sector institutions, accountability, and effectiveness are central to
achieving results across all CPF Outcomes. Robust institutions serve as a vital bridge to ensure

14 ILO estimates, 2023.



                                                   18
selected WBG interventions and the government’s broader efforts translate into tangible
development outcomes for Nepal. To help the public sector deliver services and be a credible partner
to the private sector and civil society within Nepal’s three-tiered system of public administration, the
CPF identifies several priorities: (a) making further progress in defining the roles and responsibilities
of the levels of government; (b) putting in place a well-functioning fiscal system with credible budget
and transfer mechanisms to ensure that capital and recurrent costs are properly funded; (c) enhancing
the capacity of government to deliver citizen-centric services; (d) continuing to develop transparent
and accountable management of public finances and results monitoring; and (e) continuing to support
Nepal’s commitment to inclusive public sector planning and execution approaches, with a focus on
ensuring the voice, participation, and leadership of women and marginalized communities, consistent
with the commitment to do so in Nepal’s 16th Development Plan. Success here will require all three
levels of government to become more efficient and effective in planning and execution, areas where
there remain significant capacity and implementation challenges. Addressing these issues requires a
good understanding of the political economy to ascertain what is realistically achievable within the
country’s constraints and these issues require stand-alone work but are also central to the success of
any WBG-supported sectoral intervention. The CPF period will likely see continued support through
trust fund-funded technical assistance, analytics, and advisory support in these areas.
Gender, Social Inclusion, and Citizen Engagement
64.        Promoting the economic empowerment of women and creating a more inclusive and
supportive environment for their advancement in the economy and society is a central pillar of the
16th Development Plan, and the CPF is aligned with this vision. In support of the three CPF Outcomes,
the strategic priorities in this regard are to: (i) reduce barriers to women’s productivity and economic
participation; (ii) support women in high-growth sectors, opportunities, and entrepreneurship; and
(iii) mitigate the impacts of shocks for women and girls and strengthen their adaptive capacities. The
WBG will continue to support Nepal’s ambitious efforts to advance the economic empowerment of
women, reduce gender-based violence, and support human capital accumulation, voice, and agency.
This includes tracking progress on gender outcomes across the portfolio. Addressing gender-based
violence is essential for female labor force participation and for broader social and economic
empowerment. Considering Nepal’s history of conflict and persistent multi-dimensional inequalities,
and because social inclusion is a critical element of Nepal’s 16th Development Plan, it remains an
important element of WBG programming and engagement. Additionally, the Nepal Citizen
Engagement Country Roadmap outlines a three-step strategy with actionable measures to create
enabling conditions for citizen engagement, strengthen citizen engagement systems across the federal
structure, and empower community-based participatory structures in the CPF priority areas.


                                                IV.         IMPLEMENTING THE CPF
4.1 Financing Envelope
65.     The CPF period straddles three IDA replenishment cycles – IDA20, IDA21, and IDA22. Regular
IDA resources or performance-based allocation (PBA) available to Nepal are expected to be
approximately SDR1,500 million, equivalent to US$1,956 million in FY26-31 (using the IMF end-January
2025 valuation rate).15 Some IDA20 resources will be made available for commitment in the final
months of FY25. Additional IDA resources can be sought through the Private Sector Window, Crisis
Response Window, Scale Up Window, and the new Global and Regional Opportunities Window
(GROW) for “projects that address climate adaptation and mitigation and/or address global challenges
while contributing to cross-border externalities”, as well as trust fund resources. Nepal may transition

15 Actual PBA is determined annually and will depend on: (i) total IDA resources available, (ii) the number of IDA-eligible countries, (iii) the

country’s performance rating, per-capita gross national income, and population, (iv) implementation of IDA’s Sustainable Development
Finance Policy (SDFP), and (v) the performance and other allocation parameters for IDA borrowers.

                                                                      19
from an IDA-only to an IDA “Gap country”16 or to IDA-blend status. This transition depends on Nepal’s
creditworthiness in FY26 and will occur if its Gross National Income (GNI) per capita exceeds the IDA
operational cutoff, assuming the same financing terms for IDA21 as IDA20.
66.      The WBG anticipates robust engagement during the CPF period. Proposed interventions
under the CPF will be delivered through development policy financing (approximately one per year),
performance-based operations, programmatic approaches (including relevant Global Challenge
Programs), investment project financing, guarantees, analytical and advisory services, and technical
assistance. Importantly, the WB envisages several critical programmatic engagements to underpin a
significant part of the lending program – including, potentially, in (a) growth, jobs, and the business
environment; (b) air quality; (c) integrated urban development; and (d) sustainable and job-creating
tourism. The current active IDA portfolio in Nepal comprises 19 operations, including 12 investment
projects, three program-for-results operations, and four Development Policy Credits (DPCs) including
one with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO). As of end-March 2025, net
commitment is US$2.0 billion, of which approximately US$1.3 billion remains undisbursed. The
recipient-executed trust fund portfolio is worth US$141.25 million.
67.      IFC investments are expected to be at least US$750 million during the CPF period, but
contingent on PCM enabling reforms that create markets and enable greater private sector
participation. IFC intends to expand its pipeline by leveraging its advisory and upstream services and
introducing innovative financing solutions into the Nepali market. IFC will continue to leverage and
efficiently utilize concessional finance to ensure necessary risk mitigation and that incentives are
provided to clients to enable them to meet their development objectives. However, scaling up IFC’s
program in Nepal requires strengthening of its upstream enabling environment with necessary
reforms that open the market for private sector investments, leveraging public investment
management frameworks to identify opportunities for private sector solutions, and complementing
investments with relevant advisory services to build capacity.
68.     MIGA does not have a predetermined envelope for guarantees over the CPF period. As of
end-February 2025, MIGA’s gross outstanding exposure in Nepal comprised the Upper Trishuli 1
Hydropower Project and stood at US$87 million. MIGA provided guarantees against the Breach of
Contract risk and utilized IDA PSW. Going forward, MIGA will seek to leverage the WBG Guarantee
Platform, housed at the Agency, for additional opportunities to support private sector investment in
Nepal, and potentially trade finance transactions, including those consistent with food and nutrition
security. MIGA will also explore the use of IDA PSW and other first-loss facilities in its projects.
4.2 Operationalizing the CPF
69.      The longer time horizon of the CPF is complemented by the WBG Business Planning
approach to support implementation. Annual Business Planning exercises with the government and
partners will inform pipeline programming, knowledge and analytical needs, and advisory services.
These exercises will fully align with the government’s annual work program and budget cycle,
incorporating consultations with the Ministry of Finance and the National Planning Commission to
ensure alignment with government programs and plans. The process will follow a two-part approach.
First, an annual portfolio review (jointly with the ADB) at the beginning of the FY (August-September)
to address implementation bottlenecks and draw lessons from the ongoing program. Second, a
planning and pipeline exercise in February-March to review progress toward results, reassess risks,
and adjust the program and pipeline to respond to emerging opportunities and/or risks.


16
  IDA-eligible countries that have a per capita GNI above the operational cut-off but are not creditworthy are “Gap countries” or those
that have limited creditworthiness are “Blend countries.” Blend countries have eligibility for a blend of IDA and IBRD financing resources.
The country’s creditworthiness is defined as ‘the ability to service new external debt at market interest rates over the longer term.’
Conversely, a lack of creditworthiness implies a need for concessional resources as part of a sustainable longer-term financing package for
a country’s development program.

                                                                    20
70.      Addressing portfolio implementation challenges and utilizing more programmatic
approaches to complex challenges will be front and center during the CPF period. The disbursement
ratio in FY24 dropped to below 9 percent, reflecting wider challenges in executing capital investment
in Nepal. Nonetheless, it is significantly below investments financed by the government and ADB. Of
the 19 projects in the portfolio, six are at risk and two are problem projects as of end-March 2025. In
line with Principle 2 of the CPF – balancing ambition for transformation and the need for near-term
results – efforts will be made to focus on development results and portfolio differentiation. Going
forward, the portfolio will have a smaller number of complex and ambitious, high-risk/high-reward
engagements (envisaged to be around 20 percent), such as the programs in tourism and hydropower.
The remaining 80 percent of the program will be characterized by simplicity of design, fewer project
activities, and will use phased approaches to divide complex development challenges into more “bite-
sized” pieces, utilizing more programmatic approaches like Series of Projects and Multi-phased
Approaches. This would allow the WBG and Nepal to embed individual operations in medium-term
strategic frameworks, ensuring aggregate impact while allowing for progress to be made
incrementally and for learning to be more central to WB operational engagement. A good example is
the planned Series of Projects to address Nepal’s air quality challenge. An issue as complex as
improving air quality requires a long-term commitment across sectors and instruments (with
investment by both the public sector and private actors, policy reform, surveillance, enforcement,
etc.), but showing progress and learning what does and does not work well requires an approach
which sequences interventions. So, the medium-term commitment is likely to be critically important
but a relatively limited piece of the puzzle – the replacement of highly polluting industrial boilers and
the development of the institutional framework for air quality monitoring and management – would
be the first element in a longer-term program.
71.      In addition to program differentiation, the WB will address implementation challenges
through a set of more granular portfolio management efforts aimed at improving the performance
of the WB’s operations. Ensuring alignment with the country context, appropriateness of design, and
readiness for implementation will be ever more crucial elements of the WB’s managerial approach to
its program in Nepal. For example, the WB has eliminated the need for counterpart financing of IDA-
financed operations, as budget system rigidities have been an element of the implementation
challenges. Moving forward, if projects are not performing, greater and more immediate efforts for
restructuring or closure will be pursued. The WBG will also support the government in developing
operational frameworks to reduce the turnover of project-engaged staff. For example, the WB will
now include explicit clauses on staff turnover in its financing agreements. Hands-On Expanded
Implementation Support will be utilized for both procurement and technical matters as appropriate.
The WBG also intends to make greater use of the WB’s risk assessment tools at the portfolio level.
Ongoing efforts to use the WBG and ADB’s convening power to address systemic implementation
challenges will continue, including those related to financial management, procurement, and
environmental and social risks.
72.     Despite Nepal’s robust legislative and institutional framework for public financial
management (PFM), weaknesses in the system have contributed to the implementation challenges,
including low absorption of capital budgets.17 The PEFA Assessment 2024 highlighted limitations in
macroeconomic forecasting, public investment management, policy-based budgeting, the
implementation of budgeting procedures, and delays in the scrutiny of audit reports. The budget
modality in use for results-based operations affects budget utilization. Declining revenue and
increased recurrent expenditure have also led to budget cuts, including for WB-financed projects. A
major analytical effort to better understand the broad challenges with capital budget execution is

17
  As per the Nepal PEFA Assessment 2024, 15 out of 31 indicators were scored at a level of C or below. These indicators include
Expenditure Outturn (D), Expenditure Composition Outturn (D+), Revenue Outturn (D+), Central Government Operations Outside Financial
Reports (D), Fiscal Risk Reporting (D), Public Asset Management (D+), Macroeconomic and Fiscal Forecasting (D+), Fiscal Strategy (D),
Internal Audit (D+), External Audit (D+), Budget Documentation (C), Procurement Management (C), Public Access to Fiscal Information (C),
and Legislative Scrutiny of Audit Reports (C).

                                                                  21
underway – in coordination with the ADB – that is expected to provide a range of policy and
institutional recommendations to improve the government’s capital budget utilization, an issue which
both affects the WB’s portfolio performance but is equally macro critical and is widely recognized as
a drag on Nepal’s overall economic performance. Additionally, the WB aims to establish specific
provisions for results-based operations within national systems and continue working with
development partners on technical assistance for PFM reform.
73.       Nepal’s public procurement system faces several weaknesses. This includes a disjointed legal
framework inconsistent with international standards, which needs to be updated, a lack of a
dependable procurement information system, and weak procurement planning and execution
processes. Moreover, the underutilized electronic government procurement (e-GP) System and
shortage of qualified staff further undermine procurement performance. The WB and ADB are seeking
to assess Nepal's procurement system using the OECD’s Methodology for Assessing Procurement
Systems (MAPS) to guide future reforms. The WB is also initiating dialogue with oversight agencies
(such as the Office of the Auditor General and the Commission for Investigation of Abuse of Authority)
to facilitate consistent interpretations of public procurement laws and regulations.
74.     Nepal has national laws, regulations, and institutional setups to manage environmental and
social (E&S) risks and impacts of development projects, but their implementation is weak.
Challenges such as regulatory gaps, capacity issues, funding, and E&S staffing shortages hinder
effective project preparation and implementation. For instance, in infrastructure-heavy sectors, issues
like land acquisition, forest clearance, community health and safety, and right of way further
exacerbate institutional capacity gaps, delay projects, and cause cost overruns. Additionally, limited
human resources and weak contract management capacity impede environmental protection
agencies and project E&S personnel from effectively overseeing and monitoring compliance. At the
provincial and local levels, the institutional setup and capacity remain nascent.
75.      The WB, together with ADB and other development partners, has supported reforms,
capacity building, and harmonization efforts to streamline compliance with multiple donors'
requirements and strengthen E&S systems in Nepal. Given the Environmental and Social Framework
(ESF) simplifications and the reliance on Nepal’s E&S system for IPF projects with low and moderate
risk, addressing key gaps in government E&S systems is important. This will require a strategic shift
towards programmatic capacity building, professionalizing the E&S risk management practice,
strengthening the country’s E&S approval processes, ensuring adequate E&S staffing based on risk
levels, and building on the ESF Overview Assessment for project-level E&S due diligence among other
things. The WB will prioritize scaling up ongoing training for the provincial and local levels,
incorporating Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety capacity-building and ESF components in
projects to strengthen institutional capacity, supporting policy reforms, enhancing digital tools for
effective E&S monitoring and reporting, and working with academic institutions and policy think tanks
to develop a cadre of skilled E&S professionals.
4.3 Partnerships
76.      Now more than ever, sustaining and strengthening collaboration is essential. This includes
expanding the close partnership between the IFC, MIGA, and the WB to work as ‘One WBG’. IFC will
continue to work with the WB, MIGA, and other development partners to ensure its program delivery
is in line with government priorities and the CPF objectives. Likewise, MIGA will seek stronger
collaboration with the WB and IFC through WBG Guarantee Platform instruments to support the
private sector. To this end, MIGA will leverage its regional representation for South Asia. In addition
to the close collaboration with ADB outlined throughout the CPF, collaboration with other
development partners is critical. The WBG will continue to work closely with development partners
(Table 2) through joint policy dialogue, existing platforms, trust funds, and in specific operations, for
example, the ongoing sector-wide approach in the education and health sectors and the PFM Multi-


                                                   22
donor Trust Fund. Collaboration among partners in supporting the government in improving service
delivery, air quality management, digital development, and disaster risk management is also strong
and will continue.
                                  Table 2. Partnerships and Links to CPF Indicators
 CPF Results Indicators                          WBG   ADB    FCDO    SDC                     Others
 1.1: Increased waged employment                   ✓     ✓      ✓      ✓     KWPF, ILO
 1.2: Increased private investment-to-GDP          ✓     ✓      ✓      ✓     GIZ
 1.3: More students with better education          ✓     ✓      ✓      ✓     Joint Financing Partners: ADB, EU,
                                                                             FCDO, GPE, Finland, Norway, UNICEF
                                                                             Non-Joint Financing Partners: JICA,
                                                                             WFP, UNESCO
 1.4: Increased usage of financial services        ✓     ✓      ✓      ✓     KFW (GIZ), UNDP/UNCDF, AIIB
 2.1: Improved access to transport                 ✓     ✓                   JICA
 infrastructure and services
 2.2: Improved access to electricity               ✓     ✓      ✓            KFW, FCDO, ADB, AIIB, JICA
 2.3: More people using digitally enabled          ✓
 services
 3.1: More people resilient to climate risk        ✓     ✓      ✓      ✓     KWPF, Australia, JICA, UNDP
 3.2: Better air quality                           ✓                         Green Climate Fund

4.4 Knowledge and Data
77.      The CPF will implement the current WB Knowledge Strategy for Nepal to ensure that
knowledge activities are strategic, prioritized, and focused on key development challenges. The
Knowledge Strategy envisions focusing on the generation, sharing, and application of knowledge,
including global knowledge, related to (i) growing the economy to deliver productive jobs and (ii)
improving development effectiveness, in full alignment with identified development challenges. In
addition to the core analytical products informed by global knowledge, strong client demand will guide
the selection of knowledge activities and priority will be put on just-in-time delivery that can respond
to changes in the environment. Advisory services will play a central role in supporting policy reform
and designing and implementing operations and investments in areas such as growth, jobs, and
investment climate. Efforts will continue to help build the capacity of clients in project implementation
by disseminating knowledge and experiences related to procurement, financial, and environmental
and social risk management. Exchange programs will also be part of enhancing the client’s global
knowledge and best practices. The knowledge program will engage not only the government, but also
think tanks, academia, and other development partners. The WB and IFC will collaborate on advisory
services, and the annual business planning, involving WB, IFC, and MIGA, will determine specific
activities. In FY26, knowledge gaps across sectors will guide the selectivity of new knowledge
platforms in support of CPF outcomes. To support policy development and results monitoring in line
with the Corporate Scorecard, the CPF will also focus on supporting the generation of data to measure
results under the chosen indicators.


                                  V.          MANAGING RISKS TO THE PROGRAM
78.     The overall risk to the CPF program is ‘Substantial’ (Table 3). The political and governance,
macroeconomic, institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability, fiduciary, environment
and social risk categories are all rated as Substantial.




                                                         23
                                  Table 3: Risk Rating for CPF FY25-31 (SORT)
             Risk Categories                Rating                   Risk Categories           Rating
                                                         Institutional capacity for
 Political and governance                 Substantial                                        Substantial
                                                         implementation and sustainability
 Macroeconomic                            Substantial    Fiduciary                           Substantial
 Sector strategies and policies            Moderate      Environment and social              Substantial
 Technical design                          Moderate      Stakeholders                         Moderate
                                              Overall: Substantial

79.      Political and governance (Substantial). Nepal’s political situation and political volatility pose
substantial risks to CPF implementation, particularly with the protracted transition to a fully
functioning federal state. Delays in clarifying responsibilities, funding, and accountability for local
projects and services are leading to increasing tension between the national and subnational levels of
government. The continued high turnover of government officials also remains a substantial
challenge. The WBG will seek to address these risks by sustaining its dialogue with the government
and major political parties and through regular engagement with line ministries to ensure the
continuity of strategic dialogue during government transitions. The WBG is also strengthening its
dialogue at the subnational levels, including through the provincial consultations undertaken for this
CPF. Efforts are also being made to better consider political economy challenges and adapt
interventions to the context of federalism. However, some risks, especially those related to the
political economy, are exogenous and can only be partially mitigated.
80.      Macroeconomic (Substantial). While Nepal remains at low risk of debt distress and has
demonstrated consistent, if slightly anemic, growth, its dependence on remittances and the widening
trade deficit pose significant risks to the economy. Any slowdowns in growth in partner economies
would weigh on the incomes of Nepali workers abroad and reduce remittances, stall the post-
pandemic recovery in tourism, and slow already sluggish exports. Higher commodity prices of key
imports would slow the recovery in energy-intensive sectors, aggravate food insecurity, and impose
fiscal costs. Susceptibility to environmental- and climate-related disasters could result in high fiscal
costs of reconstruction and recovery. To mitigate these risks, the WBG is supporting the government
in addressing regulatory barriers and persistent infrastructure gaps that impede private sector growth
and domestic job creation, and in strengthening fiscal management that can withstand shocks.
81.      Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability (Substantial). Nepal’s weak
capacity is exacerbated by the incomplete transition to a three-tiered system of public administration
that is causing uncertainty in collective and individual responsibility for implementation and results,
leaving many critical positions vacant (especially at the subnational level), and has manifested as
stagnation in decision-making and execution at all levels of government. In addition to working to
deepen its understanding of political economy challenges that impact engagement in the federal
context, the WBG will also continue to enhance its coordination with the Ministry of Finance to more
consistently ensure project quality at entry and focus on the joint monitoring and periodic review of
the portfolio to identify measures to improve implementation. Realism and simpler design, balanced
with efforts to enhance the capacity of the implementing agencies, and closer results monitoring will
be more systematically built into new projects.
82.      Fiduciary (Substantial). Weak procurement and financial management capacity and systems
as well as vested interests continue to pose substantial risks. To mitigate these, the WBG is supporting
the strengthening of public financial management at the national, provincial, and local levels as well
as procurement capacity. The next phase of the WB’s PFM MDTF-funded project is under preparation
to support the implementation of the government’s forthcoming PFM Reform Strategy. The WB is also
leveraging its influence to convene implementation and oversight agencies to enhance the quality of
project audits. Procurement guidance notes on the application of procurement rules to clarify
ambiguities and accelerate execution are being developed for each level of government.


                                                      24
83.     Environment and social (Substantial). Regulatory gaps in E&S systems, inadequate technical
capacity and commitment, and risks associated with tendering of PPPs (particularly transparency and
openness in the tendering and management of PPPs) present a substantial risk to the CPF. To mitigate
this and support the transition to the use of country systems for low and moderate risk projects, a
WB-supported capacity-building program focuses on ESF requirements and strengthening country
systems. Additionally, ongoing WBG and ADB coordination will be further deepened to address
regulatory gaps and build government capacity where possible.




                                                25
     Annex 1: CPF Results Framework
Mapping of CPF Outcomes to WBG Scorecard




                   1
CPF Outcome 1: More and Better Jobs (CS)
Client Context Indicator 1.1: Wage and salaried workers (% of employment), of which (%) are women
Baseline: 21.5% (2022), of which 8.4% are women           Contribution
Client Context Indicator 1.2: Private investment as a percentage of GDP
Baseline: 21.1%                                           Contribution
WBG Results Indicator 1.3: Millions of students supported with better education
Baseline: 0                                               FY31 Target: 0.51 million (WB)
WBG Results Indicator 1.4: Millions of people and businesses using financial services, of which (%) are
women
Baseline: 0                                               FY31 Target: 0.74 million (WB), 2.2 million (IFC), of
                                                          which 20% are women
Intervention Logic: Nepal has made little progress on jobs and private sector investments. Domestic labor
markets are unable to provide productive opportunities for domestic workers, including for return
migrants and more educated and qualified youth. Labor productivity is low, particularly in agriculture and
services. It is crucial for the WBG to support the growth foundations that create more and better jobs. This
includes fostering a better business environment for private sector growth and investment, supporting
urban centers and critical job-creating sectors like tourism, as well as better-quality education and skills
for the labor market. This also includes creating job and investment opportunities for qualified migrants
to return home to contribute to economic growth.
1.1. Wage and salaried workers (% of employment), of which (%) are women. The WBG will focus on
     addressing challenges in the enterprise landscape including a focus on MSMEs, which contribute to 22
     percent of Nepal’s GDP and over 45 percent of all jobs and provide potential opportunities to returnee
     migrants. Support will also focus on urban centers and job-creating sectors like tourism as growth
     engines.
1.2. Private investment as a percentage of GDP. The WBG will support regulatory and policy reform,
     including monetary and trade policy, to promote competitiveness, FDI, and productivity growth. These
     initiatives will be complemented by potential guarantees from the MIGA/WBG Guarantee Platform to
     encourage private investment in Nepal. IFC investments (with mobilizations) across the real and
     financial sectors will also contribute to this.
1.3. Millions of students supported with better education. Improved access to secondary and tertiary
     education and skills training has not resulted in an increase in formal sector jobs. With ADB, the WB
     plans to support a comprehensive skills development agenda. To boost the efficiency and productivity
     of working populations, including informal workers, youth, and women, efforts will focus on
     strengthening foundational, digital, and soft skills.
1.4. Millions of people and businesses using financial services, of which (%) are women: Focus will be on
     improved access to financial services for individuals and MSMEs, including for women and
     underserved segments, as access to credit remains a binding constraint. The WBG plans to support
     improved access to financial services through investments and capacity building for financial
     institutions to improve access to credit and digital financial services.

Lessons Learned and Knowledge: A renewed emphasis on policy changes required to facilitate private
sector-led job creation is needed, especially to help students develop market-relevant skills, and expedite
slow progress in strengthening regulation, reduce government intervention in markets, reduce tariffs and
increase FDI. Scaling up the ‘One WBG’ approach, including through joint WB/IFC/MIGA teams that work
toward agreed outcomes is critical to supporting government efforts to create more and better jobs by
encouraging private sector investment. New knowledge is encapsulated in the Country Private Sector
Diagnostic which identifies tourism, agribusiness, education, health, and IT as instrumental to enabling
private sector growth, which will inform engagement.




                                                   2
    Risks and Mitigation: There is a risk of policy reversals in response to entrenched interests. This risk will
    be mitigated through public-private sector dialogue and a focus on supporting quick wins with widespread
    support while continuing dialogue on other policies.
    Key ongoing engagements                                              Potential new engagements (18-24 months)*
    IDA:                                                                 IDA:
         • Sustainable entrepreneurship ecosystem and rural                      •   Jobs and Growth/Business Environment DPC (FY26)
            market linkages                                                      •   Sustainable and Inclusive Finance project (FY26)
        •   Support youth employment services and labor                          •   Tourism engagement Phase 1 (FY27)
            market outcomes                                                      •   Youth Employment Phase 2 (FY27)
        •   Equitable Access, and quality higher education                       •   Integrated Urban Development engagement
            focused on access, labor market needs, innovation,                       (FY27/28)
            and support to governance of School Education
        •   Strengthen financial sector stability and TA                  IFC:
        •   Business renewal and job creation TA                                 •   IFC investments/PPP in tourism, manufacturing,
                                                                                     Banking for Women, Digital Finance
                                                                                 •   Global Trade Finance Program (GTPF) to support
                                                                                     SMEs
                                                                                 •   Advisory support to financial institutions and DFS
                                                                                     provider and capital market development
                                                                                 •   Sustainable Tourism advisory

                                                                         MIGA:
                                                                                 •   WBG Guarantee Platform engagements, including in
                                                                                     PPPs, trade finance guarantees, FDI etc.




    CPF Outcome 2: Connected Communities (CS)
    WBG Results Indicator 2.1: Millions of people that benefit from improved access to sustainable
    transport infrastructure and services
    Baseline: 0                                              FY31 Target: 9 million (WB), 0.7 million (IFC)
    WBG Results Indicator 2.2: Millions of people provided with access to electricity
    Baseline: 0                                              FY31 Target: 0.46 million (WB), 0.06 million (IFC)
    WBG Results Indicator 2.3: Millions of people using digitally enabled services
    Baseline: 0                                              FY31 Target: 4 million (WB), 0.8 million (IFC)
    Intervention Logic: Considering Nepal’s diverse geography and topography and vulnerability to climate
    and environmental risks, connectivity is crucial for growth, jobs, and services. To this end, WBG support
    will focus on resilient roads, bridges, and transportation systems, access to reliable electricity and
    improved digital connectivity. Interventions under this Outcome will also contribute to improved access
    to markets and economic and education opportunities, supporting CPF Outcome 1. Additionally, they will
    provide a foundation for enhanced service delivery and disaster response, promoting resilience and
    supporting CPF Outcome 3.
    2.1. Millions of people that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and
         services. Transport connectivity is critical to job creation and facilitating private sector activity and
         productivity. The WBG will focus on national, provincial, and local connectivity. Resilient roads,
         bridges, and transportation systems will be designed to withstand disasters, ensuring continued
         functionality even in adverse conditions.
    2.2. Millions of people provided with access to electricity. Energy connectivity and resilience are
         important for market access for businesses, economic opportunities for local communities, and
         tourism. To this end, WBG support will focus on renewable energy to enhance reliable energy access
         and regional energy trade, including through large-scale hydropower projects.


  LEGEND: RED indicates more complex, higher risk – higher reward operations; and GREEN indicates operations characterized by
simplicity of design, building on current engagements and hence lower risk.

                                                                  3
2.3. Millions of people using digitally enabled services. Broadened and deepened digital development,
     including broadband connectivity and enhanced digital government services, is a crucial element for
     growth, responsive governance, and effective citizen-focused service delivery. A focus on expanding
     reliable and high-speed broadband connectivity across the country to enable digital services, especially
     in rural and underserved areas, will be the cornerstone of the WBG’s digital development plan for
     Nepal. This includes addressing three areas within the digital economy: broadband policy reforms,
     data hosting, and innovation ecosystem development. Another focus will be to increase access to
     digital services. The WB and IFC are also working to promote investment and use in Nepal’s data
     hosting capabilities, which could be supported by MIGA guarantees.

Lessons Learned and Knowledge: Nepal’s mountainous terrain and vulnerability to natural disasters
necessitate infrastructure that can withstand and respond to natural hazards and climatic events such as
floods, landslides, and earthquakes. Although private investment in hydropower has a limited direct
potential for jobs, it has strong potential for private sector investment due to more reliable and cheaper
electrification and other positive spillovers. New knowledge from the Nepal Digital Diagnostic points to
regulatory and policy barriers, including an outdated legislative framework, weak enforcement of laws and
regulations, and complex licensing schemes.

Risks and Mitigation: In addition to procurement risk, more specifically, there is a risk of enduring
inadequate coordination between the implementing agencies, utility relocation, tree cutting and
replenishment and permitting for quarries and concrete and asphalt plants, that could continue to cause
significant delays in infrastructure development. This risk will be mitigated by the set-up of interministerial
bodies tasked with expediting decision making.
Key ongoing engagements                                        Potential new engagements (18-24 months)
IDA:                                                           IDA:
    •   Transport infrastructure, strategic and rural roads,          •   Electricity Supply Reliability Improvement Project
        regional connectivity                                             (FY25)
    •   Construction and maintenance of resilient bridges             •   Digital Nepal Project, digital government services
    •   Cross border trade and competitiveness                            and broadband access (FY26)
    •   Rural Infrastructure management, capacity building            •   Upper Arun Hydroelectric Project (FY27/28)
        and governance support
    •   Energy sector reforms, renewable and hydropower        IFC:
        energy generation.                                            •   Investments and PPPs in hydropower, transport,
    •   Inclusive Digital Transformation policy support and               including for electric vehicles.
        TA                                                            •   Investments and PPPs for digital connectivity
    •   TA on Urban and E-mobility                                    •   Advisory on environment and social advisory on
    •   TA for operational support on Social Protection and               bankability and improvement of standards in
        Jobs to address knowledge gaps                                    hydropower

IFC and MIGA:                                                  MIGA:
     • Upper Trishuli 1 Hydropower (with IDA PSW)                     •   Potential WBG Guarantee Platform engagements in
                                                                          energy and infrastructure



CPF Outcome 3: Green Planet and Resilient Populations (CS)
WBG Results Indicator 3.1: Millions of people with enhanced resilience to climate risk
Baseline: 0                                             FY31 Target: 11 million (WB), 0.8 million (IFC)
Client Context Indicator 3.2: Percentage of people exposed to hazardous air quality
Baseline: 70.3% (2023)                                  Contribution
Intervention Logic: Nepal faces recurrent natural disasters with limited financial capacity to manage these
risks. Enhancing the sustainability of infrastructure and natural resources and building resilience to shocks
for communities and the economy are critical. The WBG plans to support the strengthening of the
institutional framework for crises and disaster preparedness at all levels of government, more sustainable


                                                          4
use of land and natural resources, and the transformation of the rural economies towards higher value-
added agriculture, and, provided there is demand, the development and institutionalization of shock-
responsive social protection.
3.1. Millions of people with enhanced resilience to climate risk. The WB will support policy and
     institutional reforms to strengthen disaster risk preparedness and response capacity, as well as risk
     reduction and community resilience. A Cat-DDO and related programmatic support will help improve
     Nepal’s preparedness for climate and disaster-related risks. Support in the areas of resilient
     infrastructure, irrigation, and sustainable landscapes, including forests, also contribute to this
     indicator target. IFC will continue to support the greening of Nepal’s financial sector through advisory
     services and/or investments for financial institutions and/or regulators.
3.2. Percentage of people exposed to hazardous air quality. Nepal ranks second globally for the share of
     population exposed to hazardous air pollution. Addressing the air quality in Nepal is crucial for people,
     climate, and livability, and hence by extension, for jobs and growth. A series of regional and national
     interventions are planned, aiming to strengthen air quality governance and reduce air pollution in
     critical sectors.

Lessons Learned and Knowledge: Critical for building resilience is an approach that reduces risk exposure
through the direct mitigation of disasters and climate hazards and strengthens the financing and coping
mechanisms for when they do occur. Risks related to recurrent disasters exacerbated by climate change
vary across Nepal’s diverse terrain and mitigation requires a spatially differentiated approach. Inclusive
forest user groups have been critical to the equitable sharing of the benefits of improved forestry
productivity and environmental sustainability. New knowledge relevant to this outcome comes from the
2022 CCDR which emphasizes an integrated network approach to water, forests, and agriculture.

Risks and Mitigation: The risk of opposition to climate-smart agriculture and changes in forestry and water
management practices will be mitigated by dialogue with all stakeholders and by supporting policies that
help ensure that the benefits of changes are retained within the communities and businesses that
implement them.
Key ongoing engagements                                      Potential new engagements (18-24 months)
IDA:                                                         IDA:
     •   Policy support to Green, Resilient, and Inclusive          •   Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation
         Development including climate resilience, forest               Project - Phase 3 (FY25)
         management and Carbon Financing TA                         •   Nepal Clean Air and Prosperity Project (FY26) and
     •   Governance in Water and Urban Sectors and TA                   subsequent phases in FY27/28
     •   Sustainable entrepreneurship ecosystem and rural           •   Social Protection Phase 2 (FY27)
         market linkages
     •   Irrigation, agriculture productivity, food and      IFC:
         nutrition security and water management and TA             •   IFC investments to support greening of financial
     •   Disasters including climate induced disasters and              sector and farmers (e.g. climate smart agriculture)
         health emergency support                                   •   Investments in agribusiness and IFC Advisory related
     •   Forestry Management and TA                                     to agribusiness and climate smart agriculture.
                                                                    •   Investments in infrastructure and transport that
                                                                        support reduction in emissions

                                                             MIGA:
                                                                    •   Potential WBG Guarantee Platform engagements in
                                                                        projects that support climate risk resilience and/or
                                                                        contribute to emissions reduction




                                                         5
Annex 2: Completion and Learning Review




                  II
                                        Document of
                                       The World Bank

                                   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY



                     INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
                       INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
                    MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY




                           COMPLETION AND LEARNING REVIEW
                       OF THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK
                                        FOR
                                       NEPAL

                                 FOR THE PERIOD FY19-FY24




                              Nepal Country Management Unit
                                        South Asia

                           The International Finance Corporation
                                        Asia Pacific

                      The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency



This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
  of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Group
                                             authorization.
                                                FISCAL YEAR18
                                               July 16 - July 15

                                          CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                                     (Exchange Rate Effective June 30, 2024)

                                     Currency Unit = Nepali Rupee (NPR)
                                             US$1 = NPR 133.40


                                      ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADB     Asian Development Bank                          GDP      Gross Domestic Product
AS      Advisory Services                               GHG      Green House Gas
ASA     Advisory Services and Analytics                 GoN      Government of Nepal
BRCRHP  Building Resilience to Climate-Related          GRID     Green, Resilient, and Inclusive
        Hazards Project                                          Development
CAR     Capital Adequacy Ratio                          GSEEP    Grid Solar and Energy Efficiency Project
Cat-DDO Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option            GTFP     Global Trade Finance Program
CCB     Climate Co-Benefits                             HEI      Higher Education Institution
CCDR    Country Climate and Development Report          IDA      International Development Association
CE      Citizen Engagement                              IEG      Independent Evaluation Group
CERC    Contingent Emergency Response                   IFC      International Finance Corporation
        Component                                       InfraSAP Infrastructure Sector Assessment
CLR     Completion and Learning Review                  IPF      Investment Project Financing
CPF     Country Partnership Framework                   IPFMRP Integrated Public Financial Management
CPS     Country Partnership Strategy                             Reform Project
CSA     Climate Smart Agriculture                       MDTF     Multi-donor Trust Fund
CSO     Civil Society Organization                      MIGA     Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
CPF     Country Partnership Framework                   MIS      Management Information System
DE      Development Effectiveness                       MoF      Ministry of Finance
DFI     Development Finance Institution                 MoFAGA Ministry of Federal Affairs and General
DNA     Digital Nepal Acceleration                               Administration
DP      Development Partner                             MSMEs Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
DPC     Development Policy Credit                       NDC      Nationally Determined Contribution
ESG     Environmental, Social, and Governance           NEA      Nepal Electricity Authority
EVENT   Enhanced Vocational Education and               NIRTTP   Nepal-India Regional Trade and Transport
        Training Project                                         Project
EVM     Effective Vaccine Management                    NLSIP    Nepal Livestock Sector Innovation Project
E&S     Environmental and Social                        NLSS     Nepal Living Standards Survey
FANSEP Food and Nutrition Security Enhancement          PASA     Programmatic Advisory Services and
        Project                                                  Analytics
FCGO    Financial Comptroller General Office            PEFA     Public Expenditure and Financial
FCI     Finance, Competitiveness, and Innovation                 Accountability
FCNA    Federalism Capacity Needs Assessment            PFM      Public Financial Management
FCPF    Forest Carbon Partnership Facility              PforR    Program-for-Results
FCV     Fragility, Conflict, and Violence               PIU      Project Implementation Unit
FWG     Federalism Working Group                        PLR      Performance and Learning Review
FDI     Foreign Direct Investment                       PMU      Project Management Unit
F4G     Finance for Growth                              PPCR     Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
GBV     Gender-Based Violence                           PPP      Public-Private Partnership



18
     Fiscal year for Government of Nepal
RMDC     Rural Microfinance Development Centre    TA         Technical Assistance
SCD      Systematic Country Diagnostic            TF         Trust Fund
SDC      Swiss Agency for Development and         UNDP       United Nations Development Program
         Cooperation                              UT-1       Upper Trishuli-1
SFM      Sustainable Forest Management            WB         The World Bank
SME      Small and Medium Enterprise              WBG        World Bank Group
SNG      Subnational Government                   WHO        World Health Organization
SREP     Sustainable Renewable Energy Program     YETI       Youth Employment Transformation
SSA      Social Security Allowance                           Initiative
SSDP     School Sector Development Program




                      IDA                        IFC                          MIGA
 Vice President:      Martin Raiser              Riccardo Puliti              Ethiopis Tafara

 Division Director:   David N. Sislen            Imad Najib Ayed Fakhoury     Şebnem Erol Madan

 Task Team
                      Aayushma KC                Siddhartha Prasai            Persephone Economou
 Leader(s):
                                  NEPAL FY19-24 COMPLETION AND LEARNING REVIEW

                                                                 Table of Contents

I.        INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 1

II.       PROGRESS TOWARD CPF DEVELOPMENT OUTCOMES .................................................... 2
      Focus Area 1: Public Institutions ....................................................................................................... 2
      Focus Area 2: Private Sector-Led Jobs and Growth .......................................................................... 3
      Focus Area 3: Inclusion and Resilience.............................................................................................. 5

III. WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE............................................................................. 7
      Design ................................................................................................................................................. 7
      Program Implementation .................................................................................................................. 8

IV. ALIGNMENT WITH CORPORATE GOALS ......................................................................... 11
      Alignment with the Twin Goals ....................................................................................................... 11
      Corporate Commitments ................................................................................................................. 12

V.        LESSONS LEARNED........................................................................................................... 12

CLR Annex 1: Summary of Progress on Nepal FY19-24 CPF Results Matrix .......................... 14
CLR Annex 2: Detailed Evaluation of the Nepal FY19-24 CPF Results Matrix ....................... 16
CLR Annex 3: IDA Lending program FY19-24 Planned vs Actual ........................................... 46
CLR Annex 4: World Bank Nepal Portfolio FY19-24 ............................................................... 54
CLR Annex 5: IFC Committed and Outstanding portfolio FY19-24 ........................................ 58
CLR Annex 6: IFC Approved or Active Advisory Services in CPF Period FY19-24 .................. 59
CLR Annex 7: MIGA’s Guarantee Portfolio as of end-June 2024 ........................................... 62
                                NEPAL FY19-24 COMPLETION AND LEARNING REVIEW

Country Partnership Framework (FY19-23): Discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on August 7, 2018
Performance and Learning Review: Discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on January 17, 2022

                                                     I.         INTRODUCTION

1.     This Completion and Learning Review (CLR) assesses the implementation of the World Bank
Group’s (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Nepal (FY19-23), extended until FY24
through a Performance and Learning Review (PLR). It assesses the achievements of the CPF program
and WBG performance and derives lessons to inform the forthcoming CPF.

2.       Nepal made remarkable improvements in living standards over the last decade. Nepal’s
poverty rate decreased from 25.16 to 3.57 percent between 2011 and 2023.19 Improvements were
supported by economic growth but driven by factors like remittances and non-agricultural wage
incomes. Over the past decade, real GDP grew at an average rate of 4.2 percent. In FY23, average
inflation reached a seven-year high of 7.7 percent and the fiscal deficit was 5.8 percent of GDP due to
the dependence of tax revenue on imports. The higher fiscal deficit and slower economic growth
increased public debt, which reached 42.7 percent in FY24 (up from 27.2 percent in FY19). However,
Nepal’s public debt remains sustainable.

3.       The CPF reflected opportunities presented by Nepal’s emerging federal context and was
well aligned with Nepal’s 2030 vision20 and its 14th and 15th Periodic Plans. The CPF was prepared as
Nepal transitioned to a federal state under the 2015 Constitution, which introduced a three-tier
governance structure – federal, provincial, and local. The WBG program in the CPF, informed by the
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), was implemented in this new federal structure and supported
Nepal’s goal to become a middle-income country (MIC) by 2030. The CPF organized WBG assistance
in three interrelated focus areas: (a) strengthening public institutions for effective service delivery, (b)
improving conditions for private sector-led jobs and growth, and (c) addressing inclusion in human
development outcomes and building resilience to climate change, natural disasters, and health shocks.

4.      The PLR introduced several adjustments in the CPF to respond to the post-COVID-19 global
and country context, including five thematic shifts within the three focus areas to: (a) support Nepal’s
long-term development trajectory by pivoting to Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development (GRID)
as the overarching framework, (b) leverage COVID-19 relief and economic recovery to build back
better, (c) leverage the WBG’s comparative advantage to focus on fiscal federalism within the
federalism agenda, (d) unlock human capital development for post-COVID-19 recovery and resilience,
and (e) harness digital development for better service delivery.

5.      The CPF Development Outcome is rated                                        Table 1: Outcomes of CPF Indicators
‘Moderately Satisfactory’. (See Annexes 1 and 2). The                               Ratings             Status Percentage
program made significant progress in reaching the 12 CPF                            Achieved           25 of 42      59%
objectives, with two fully ‘Achieved’, six ‘Mostly Achieved’,                       Mostly Achieved    10 of 42      24%
three ‘Partially Achieved’, and one ‘Not Achieved’. These                           Partially Achieved 3 of 42        7%
objectives were supported by 42 indicators (see Table 1).                           Not Achieved       4 of 42       10%


19
  These figures are based on the 2011 poverty line. Nepal’s new poverty line increases the real value of the poverty threshold by 70 percent
and shows that 20.27 percent of the population lives in poverty (Nepal Living Standards Survey IV).

20
  Nepal’s long term Development Strategy, 2030 serves as a guide for graduating from Least Developed Country status, achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, and becoming a middle-income country by 2030.



                                                                                                                                          1
6.      Overall WBG performance is rated ‘Good’, but implementation faced severe challenges.21
Progress was made in the CPF’s 12 objectives (see above) and flexibility in its design allowed timely
adjustment to the federal transition and COVID-19, and the pivot to GRID. Efforts were made to
deepen collaboration within the WBG and with Development Partners (DPs) to leverage financing,
partnerships, and technical expertise to support Nepal’s MIC ambitions. With that said, the CPF
correctly identified risks, particularly political and governance risks arising from the federal transition,
some of which materialized. The program faced significant challenges – implementation continued to
be extremely slow despite proactive efforts such as regular monitoring, follow-ups at the highest and
sectoral levels (in collaboration with other DPs), and a strong in-country presence of task team leaders
(TTLs). Various factors contributed to these implementation issues, including inadequate focus on
project readiness, challenges arising from the dynamic nature of the post-federalization political
economy, weak institutional capacity, and exogenous factors like COVID-19 and frequent changes in
government and bureaucracy.

                              II.        PROGRESS TOWARD CPF DEVELOPMENT OUTCOMES

7.     The CPF’s overall Development Outcome is rated ‘Moderately Satisfactory’. Annex 1
presents a summary of ratings by Focus Area and Annex 2 assesses progress for each objective22.

Focus Area 1: Public Institutions

8.      Nepal’s 2015 Constitution introduced a federal system, offering an opportunity to
strengthen public institutions to enhance equity and inclusion. To leverage this, WBG interventions
focused on improving budget and revenue management as well as service delivery in the new federal
system. This Focus Area is rated Moderately Satisfactory as both objectives were mostly achieved.

9.       Objective 1.1: Improved budget and revenue management was mostly achieved. The multi-
donor trust funded (MDTF) Integrated Public Financial Management Reform Project (IPFMRP) aimed
to create an enabling environment for fiscal federalism implementation. Key IPFMRP results that
support Objective 1.1 include (i) real-time availability of all tax collection information at the federal
and provincial levels, (ii) gender-informed aspects in budgets across all provinces, (iii) citizen
involvement in one or more stages of the budget process in more than 50 percent of subnational
governments (SNGs), and (iv) publicly available consolidated public expenditure data for all SNGs.
Despite this progress, capital expenditure spending continues to bunch in the last quarter of the fiscal
year due to slow decision-making and weak procurement capacity. While WB provided support
through the Programmatic Fiscal and Public Financial Management (PFM) Development Policy Credits
(DPCs) and the IPFMRP, this challenge will persist without radical reforms. DPCs helped the
Government of Nepal (GoN) establish a legal and regulatory framework for PFM systems and
procedures in the federal context. However, the latest Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
(PEFA) Assessment (2024) shows mixed results in PFM performance. Improvements were made in the
transparency of intergovernmental fiscal relations through transparent and rule-based fiscal transfers
and efficacy in taxpayer registration and collection transfer to the treasury, but budget credibility
declined with a higher variance between budgeted and actual expenditure and revenues. Further, the
lack of an effective PFM reform coordination mechanism caused implementation delays.

10.          Objective 1.2: Strengthened institutions for public sector management and service delivery

21
  The WBG performance rating is based on a four-point scale – Superior, Good, Fair, and Poor. A ‘Good’ rating is given when the design and
implementation of the program successfully contribute to key CPF Objectives and the timely adaptation to changing circumstances and
priorities, and a sound program of ongoing activities is in place for the next engagement period.

22
     Data cutoff: June 30, 2024, with some projects collecting data only until their closure date.



                                                                                                                                        2
was mostly achieved. Progress was observed in improving management and service delivery in health,
education, and social protection. The Strengthening Systems for Social Protection and Civil
Registration Project helped expand digitized service delivery through technical and human resource
support across the local level. This resulted in 738 of 753 local governments adopting online
registration and 5.3 million civil events registered between July 2019 and June 2024. The Health Sector
Management Reform Program contributed to improving Nepal’s Effective Vaccine Management
score23 from 64 percent to 82.2 percent during the CPF period. Births registered within the first year
of birth in the Management Information System (MIS) increased from 7,000 to 1,198,931 between
2018 and June 2024. In education, the School Sector Development Program helped increase funds
disbursed to community schools in compliance with eligibility and utilization guidelines from 92.63 to
99.9 percent. However, per the WB Country-Level Institutional Assessment and Review, key global
indicators did not reflect significant changes in Nepal’s public institutional strength.

11.      WB commissioned Advisory Services and Analytics (ASAs) to strengthen the core functions
and systems of public institutions for the federal transition. To support newly elected officials, the
Federalism Capacity Needs Assessment (FCNA) identified gaps between needs and capacity at all levels
of government, laying the groundwork for federalism implementation and informing GoN programs
like the Provincial and Local Governance Support Program. FCNA was also supported by the Swiss
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) and United Nations Development Program (UNDP).
To make WB’s federalism engagement more strategic, the PLR narrowed its focus to the
implementation of fiscal federalism. To strengthen intergovernmental fiscal transfers, under the Nepal
Fiscal Federalism Advisory Support Program, WB conducted a Fiscal Gap Analysis to assess SNGs’
expenditure needs and revenue capacity. This analysis is contributing to GoN’s ongoing review of the
federal Fiscal Equalization Grants distribution formula. The Fiscal Federalism Update 2023 identified
key reforms to improve fiscal federalism outcomes, including the need for a clear fiscal federalism
roadmap.

Focus Area 2: Private Sector-Led Jobs and Growth

12.    Unlocking private sector engagement is critical to achieving Nepal’s MIC target by 2030.
WBG interventions sought to support a shift in Nepal’s economic structure to improve the
environment for private sector investments and create income opportunities for the poor, youth,
women, and the vulnerable. This Focus Area is rated Moderately Satisfactory as two objectives were
achieved, two were mostly achieved, one was partially achieved, and one was not achieved.

13.      Objective 2.1. Improved power generation capacity and access to electricity was achieved.
During the CPF period, Nepal began exporting electricity to India during the monsoon season and
continued importing during the dry season. The Grid Solar and Energy Efficiency Project (GSEEP) and
the Sustainable Renewable Energy Program helped expand renewable energy capacity by 25 MW via
a solar plant supplying the Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) grid and a 4.94 GWh annual increase in
off-grid biogas-based electricity. GSEEP helped supply 33 GWh of green electricity and upgraded and
expanded 3,608 km of distribution lines, including substations, providing 500,000 people access to
new or improved electricity services. The Nepal-India Electricity Transmission and Trade Project
improved regional energy exchange by constructing 85 km of high voltage 400 kV transmission lines,
enhancing the reliability of electricity supply through imports. The transmission lines are operating at
capacity, with a maximum of 700 MW traded. The Energy DPC series24 supported institutional reforms
strengthening the sector’s financial performance, including a plan for NEA staff efficiency, tariff reform

23
 The Effective Vaccine Management score is a standard score with nine parameters to determine the management and quality of vaccine
management at the central, regional, and service delivery levels.

24
     The third Energy DPC was dropped due to legislative delays related to the Electricity Bill.



                                                                                                                                 3
support, and operationalizing the Electricity Regulatory Commission. The MIGA and IFC-supported
hydropower project, Upper Trishuli-1 (UT-1), and IFC’s Nepal Hydro Sector Development Advisory
Project contributed to an additional 661 MW of generation capacity (under construction or
operational).

14.      Objective 2.2. Increased transport connectivity, improved maintenance, and road safety
was partially achieved. WB investments led to improvements in transport infrastructure. The Second
Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Program helped increase the share of bridges in good and fair
condition in targeted routes from 75 to 83 percent over 2018-24. A 12.17 percent increase in the
population within a two to four-hour walking distance of an all-weather road in the targeted Terai and
hill districts was achieved under the Project for Strengthening the National Rural Transport
Programs.25 Due to delays in recruiting a project management consultant for design works during the
pandemic, the target of implementing the Safe Corridor Demonstration Program on 95 km of road
was not met. Overall, road safety remains an issue, with fatalities and injuries costing 5.6 percent of
GDP (WHO, 2020). Road accidents accounted for 2.9 percent of total deaths in Nepal in 2020.

15.     Objective 2.3. Improved financial sector stability and financial inclusion was mostly
achieved. WBG helped improve Nepal’s financial stability and inclusion and enabling environment for
long-term finance. Nepal’s capital fund coverage26 increased from 0.95 to 1.6 percent during the CPF
period. WB’s engagement in the agriculture sector helped increase access to finance for producer
groups through subprojects. The Nepal Livestock Sector Innovation Project (NLSIP) helped 447
businesses attract US$12.65 million in loans from over 30 financial institutions, with US$5.95 million
equity contributions. IFC implemented a programmatic approach to expand small and medium
enterprise (SME) financing through commercial banks, committing US$216 million during FY19-24.
This complemented IFC MSME financing through microfinance institutions and private equity funds.
This engagement has helped IFC’s clients provide financing to 63,727 SMEs and 2,068,195 individuals.

16.     WB supported policy reforms targeting weaknesses in corporate governance, risk
management, and the operational framework, as identified in the Deposit and Credit Guarantee
Fund’s assessment based on WB Principles for Public Credit Guarantee Schemes for SMEs. The reforms
are designed to increase green guarantees as a share of total new credit guarantees. The Finance for
Growth (F4G) DPC series played a pivotal role in strengthening the stability of the financial sector by
reinforcing the central bank’s oversight and risk management capacity, including through the
implementation of the Supervisory Information System. Additionally, the disclosure of climate risk
exposure within loan portfolios, amendments to the Money Laundering Prevention Act, and revisions
to the Banking and Financial Institutions Act strengthened regulatory governance and risk
management.

17.      Objective 2.4. Improved regulatory environment for competitiveness was achieved. The
Nepal-India Regional Trade and Transport Project (NIRTTP) helped improve transport and logistics
networks by expanding and modernizing key border crossings and trade routes. This helped reduce
transit times (from 61 hours to 54 hours for both export and import) and trade costs, facilitating
smoother cross-border movement of goods and strengthening Nepal’s connectivity with India and
China. NIRTTP also helped implement modern customs management systems and enhanced customs
and regulatory bodies’ capacity to streamline trade procedures through targeted training programs.



25
  In the Terai districts, the population within two hours walking distance from an all-weather road increased by 12.35 percent, whereas in
the Hill districts, the population within four hours walking distance from an all-weather road increased by 11.81 percent.

26
     Capital fund coverage measures total capital as a percent of total insured deposits in the financial system.



                                                                                                                                             4
18.      Objective 2.5. Improved income opportunities was mostly achieved. To support income
opportunities, agriculture projects co-financed agrifood SMEs and producer groups’ investment plans,
leveraged grant funding, and facilitated a stronger alliance between producer groups and private
sector buyers. NLSIP and the Food and Nutrition Security Enhancement Project (FANSEP) supported
select value chains and helped increase sales of commercial and nutritional products like milk. FANSEP
beneficiary households experienced a 15.58 percent increase in income. The Youth Employment
Transformation Initiative (YETI) Project and the Enhanced Vocational Education and Training Project II
(EVENT II) led to temporary employment for 132,000 people and vocational training for 110,000
youths. YETI helped establish 740 Employment Service Centers at the local level, which register
unemployed individuals and other job seekers and identify employment opportunities, among other
functions. Around 82 percent of EVENT II vocational training participants found employment within
six months. The training was pro-poor and pro-equity, offering financial incentives for female
participants and individuals from disadvantaged communities. Nonetheless, the overall picture
remains concerning. Over a third of Nepali domestic workers were self-employed or engaged in unpaid
work in 2023. The population outside the labor force remains high among the secondary (52 percent)
and tertiary (28 percent) educated, and unemployment rates are high across all education levels.
COVID-19 impacted two in every five Nepali workers, and 22 percent of lost jobs remain unrecovered,
while 23 percent transitioned to lower-quality employment.

19.     Objective 2.6. Increased Access to Digital Services was not achieved. Internet access has
increased in Nepal in the last five years. However, the Digital Nepal Acceleration (DNA) Project, aimed
at supporting GoN’s Digital Nepal Framework, had to be fully canceled after remaining in
unsatisfactory status due to a change in GoN’s position on its implementation arrangements.
Inadequate progress in amending the Telecommunications Act led to a related prior action in the
Second Fiscal DPC being dropped. Despite these setbacks, WBG has continued to engage on the digital
agenda through regular dialogue with the private sector and GoN. Under the F4G DPC, WBG supported
the adoption of digital payment systems via the Retail Payments Strategy, Interoperability of Payment
Transactions, and QR code standardization, contributing to nearly tripling the use of digital payments
in Nepal since July 2019.

Focus Area 3: Inclusion and Resilience

20.     Promoting greater inclusion and protecting the most vulnerable will enable Nepal’s
inclusive and resilient development. WBG engagements in this Focus Area sought to operationalize
Nepal’s GRID agenda and mainstream the climate agenda across sectors. This Focus Area is rated
Moderately Satisfactory as three objectives were mostly achieved and one was partially achieved.

21.      Objective 3.1. Improved equity in access to quality education was mostly achieved. WB’s
support focused on results-based financing for GoN’s School Sector Development Program (SSDP)
through a Program for Results (PforR) operation, where it was instrumental in convening nine DPs.
WB’s support for SSDP contributed to (i) bringing back 68.7 percent of out-of-school children in fifteen
disadvantaged districts to schools or learning centers and (ii) 75 percent of poor students achieving at
least a 1.6 GPA in the 2020 Secondary Education Examination. WB also supported higher education,
including in establishing engineering and other curricula in universities, strengthening quality
assurance, and adopting digital solutions. The Higher Education Reforms Project helped establish
sixteen autonomous academic programs at the Bachelor and Master levels in various universities.
Aligned with market needs, autonomous programs foster an environment for active learning through
project works, internships, and other activities.

22.     Objective 3.2. Improved access to services and support for the well-being of vulnerable
groups was mostly achieved. This objective was supported by WB interventions in the water and
agriculture sectors and gender-based violence (GBV) prevention. The Rural Water Supply and

                                                                                                      5
Sanitation Improvement Project provided 1,140,770 individuals with improved water supply. To
address malnutrition among six to 23-month children and promote a nutrient-rich diet, FANSEP helped
establish nutrition gardens for highly vulnerable households and supported nutrition field schools
where existing mothers’ groups received skill-based nutrition education. This improved the uptake of
nutrition-rich foods significantly. The Integrated Platform for Gender-based Violence Prevention and
Response Project improved GBV survivors’ access to support services and justice. It supported a 24-
hour toll-free helpline offering multisectoral services like shelter, psychosocial support, legal aid, and
child support. Since 2017, 69,580 GBV survivors have benefitted from these services.

23.     Objective 3.3. Increased resilience to health shocks, natural disasters, and climate change
was partially achieved. Social protection in Nepal has limited coverage of the poor and lacks scalability
during shocks. To strengthen this system, the Strengthening Systems for Social Protection and Civil
Registration Project helped Nepal transition to an online civil registration system, digitize the Social
Security Allowances (SSA) beneficiary database, and shift to electronic payments. Around 98 percent
of 6,743 wards now register civil events online and all SSA beneficiaries receive allowances in their
banks. To build resilience as natural disasters become more frequent, the Building Resilience to
Climate-Related Hazards Project (BRCRHP) strengthened weather, water, and climate services by
helping install 88 meteorological and 70 hydrological stations, one weather radar, and calibration labs.
The Climate Adaptation and Resilience for South Asia Project helped enhance government policy,
standards, and capacity on climate-resilient development and decision-making. The Earthquake
Housing Reconstruction Project (EHRP) helped rebuild around 300,000 earthquake-affected houses to
multi-hazard resilience standards and install 34 multi-hazard early warning systems in 13
municipalities. EHRP contributed to Nepal’s overall shift toward more resilient construction practices
and, together with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat-DDO), helped update the Nepal
National Building Code 105 on Seismic Design of Buildings.

24.     WB supported disaster risk financing solutions through a Cat-DDO, Finance for Growth and
the GRID DPC series, EHRP, Contingency Emergency Response Components (CERCs) in projects, and
Trust Funds (TFs). These include a Disaster Risk Financing Strategy, an Implementation Plan, and risk-
based pricing for climate-related insurance products. Together, these lay the groundwork for an
additional tier of non-sovereign private sector financing (via insurance products and/or catastrophe
bonds) to address earthquakes and floods. The GRID DPC series is supporting policies to strengthen
hydrometeorological network capacity, which will improve data by sequencing a series of disaster risk
financing products. A Cat-DDO and Pandemic Emergency Financing supported GoN policies to improve
technical and institutional capacity to manage climate change and natural disaster risks. The Cat-DDO
helped create an enabling environment through the approval of the Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Regulation and National Climate Change Policy (2019) and provided US$24.5 million to
GoN following significant flooding events in 2020.

25.     Objective 3.4. Improved adoption of sustainable natural resource management was mostly
achieved. WBG engagements in the agriculture and forest sectors have helped increase resilience
through the sustainable use of natural resources. WB Agriculture Project FANSEP helped 25,195
farmers (71% female) and Nepal Livestock Sector Innovation Project farmers 47,673 (48.3% female)
adopt climate-smart agricultural (CSA) practices. IFC’s Pilot Program for Climate Resilience Nepal
advisory project helped an additional 12,000 farmers (43 percent female) adopt CSA practices. The
Nepal Emission Reduction Program for Terai Arc Landscape used carbon financing to incentivize
greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions through reduced deforestation and forest degradation, and by
promoting sustainable forest management (SFM) and better land use across five provinces. The
program, through 2021 emissions reduction purchase agreements, will make payments upon the
independent verification of reduced emissions which will conclude around project closure. According
to the GoN’s report (under verification), between 2018 and 2021, there was a net decrease of


                                                                                                        6
approximately 2.3 million CO2e. The Forest for Prosperity Project is helping improve SFM in the federal
context, with a focus on the Madhesh and Lumbini Provinces.

                              III.    WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

26.     WBG’s overall performance is rated ‘Good’. The CPF enabled the WBG to respond to a
changing global and country context and GoN’s priorities. Although most of the planned IDA program
was carried out, implementation remained a critical challenge due to an insufficient focus on project
readiness. Further, the trend of frequent government changes, resulting in a high turnover of
bureaucrats and project staff, contributed to delays in decision-making.

Design

27.     The CPF was aligned with GoN’s development priorities. The program was informed by GoN’s
aim to become a MIC by 2030, as outlined in its Envisioning Nepal 2030, and the 14th (FY16/17-18/19)
and 15th (FY19/20-23/24) Periodic Plans. Of the six action areas in the SCD that reinforced GoN’s
development priorities and IDA19 policy commitments, the program, based on WBG’s comparative
advantage, focused on three areas – strengthening public institutions, improving private sector-led
jobs and growth, and promoting greater inclusion and resilience.

28.      Lessons from the previous Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY14-18 were incorporated
into the CPF design. The CPS was implemented during Nepal’s period of federal transition, 2015
earthquakes, and trade disruptions, warranting flexibility. A similar approach continued in the CPF
FY19-24, with not all engagements predetermined at the design stage to ensure flexibility and
adaptability. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, CERCs were introduced in all 11 new IPFs
(compared to six in the CPS) and three IPFs were restructured to add CERCs. WBG also responded
swiftly to COVID-19 by restructuring its portfolio, balancing the short-term need to protect lives and
livelihoods with medium- to long-term opportunities for recovery. Recognizing the nascency of the
federal Nepali state and its need for reforms and capacity building, the program also evolved to focus
on policy support through an increased number of DPC operations (e.g., Energy DPC and GRID DPC
series), which were not predetermined at the CPF design stage. Both ASAs and DPCs contributed to
the design and implementation of core federal arrangements, including formulas for equalization
grants, allocation of tax revenues across government levels, and expenditure mandates. Similarly,
when DPCs were found to not address development challenges, the program dropped planned
interventions (e.g., Third Energy DPC and Third Fiscal DPC).

29.      The CPF results framework could have been more streamlined, outcome-oriented, and
realistic. The results framework fails to capture some key results, such as the outcomes of the US$700
million Earthquake Housing and Reconstruction Project. The results chain for some objectives could
have been stronger. The Integrated Public Financial Management Reform Project was expected to
support Indicator 1.1.1 on capital bunching, but its interventions were not comprehensive enough to
notably influence it within the given timeframe. Greater focus on private sector engagement within
the results framework would have been beneficial. Some indicators are output-oriented, like Indicator
3.3.3: ‘Adoption of disaster risk financing and insurance schemes,’ and some are not clearly defined
e.g. Indicator 3.2.3 Number of Gender Based Violence (GBV) survivors have access to justice and
support.

30.      The overall risk to achieving CPF objectives was assessed as Substantial at the CPF approval
and PLR stages, with some risks materializing. The risks were well-identified, and the mitigation
measures were somewhat successful. Three High risks were identified: (a) political and governance,
arising from federal transition, (b) fiduciary, related to weak governance and financial irregularities at
the national and SNG levels that could increase in the early years of federalism, and (c) environmental

                                                                                                        7
and social (E&S), including climate change. At the PLR-stage, efforts to strengthen federalism and
improved engagement with political leaders and GoN officials led to political and governance risks
being revised from High to Substantial. WB efforts to streamline E&S risk management capacity and
improve the PFM system also lowered fiduciary and E&S risk ratings from High to Substantial.
However, the risk related to political uncertainty remains unchanged. Since 2017, including after the
November 2022 elections, Nepal has had three prime ministers, six government changes, and two
dissolutions of the Federal Parliament’s House of Representatives (as of June 2024), along with several
changes in the cabinet and bureaucracy.

Program Implementation

31.      Lending remained high but project implementation slowed down significantly. Between
FY19-24, the program delivered over US$2.4 billion in IDA commitments through 26 national (US$1.6
billion) and two regional (US$725 million) operations. US$280 million of IDA financing was delivered
in FY24. At the beginning of the CPF period, there were 24 operations with US$2.2 billion in net
commitments, of which seven were in problem status and 43 percent of the funds were undisbursed.
As of June 30, 2024, the portfolio includes 24 projects with a net commitment of US$2.3 billion, with
seven projects (71 percent of net commitment) in problem status and 73 percent of funds
undisbursed. About 57 percent of closed projects evaluated by IEG received “satisfactory” outcomes,
at par with South Asia’s average of 58 percent but below the global average of 80 percent.

32.     Project design became more complex due to the federalism transition, multi-sectoral
engagements, and a greater mix of financing instruments. WBG increasingly supported challenging,
transformational projects to aid Nepal’s MIC ambitions and federalism transition, recognizing that
despite early-stage challenges and capacity limitations, federalism is vital for the country’s long-term
development. Nepal explored a mix of WB financing instruments, including multi-sectoral IPFs (50
percent) which included carbon financing, programmatic DPCs (28.9 percent), and PforRs (21.1
percent). While multi-sectoral collaboration enhanced engagement between sectors, limited
coordination within GoN negatively impacted the implementation of multi-agency projects such as
the Nepal Strategic Road Connectivity and Trade Improvement Project. Attempts to introduce IPF
components providing TA in transport and education PforRs were unsuccessful due to GoN’s
reluctance to use credit funds for TA. While slow to implement, regional projects yielded benefits and
paved the way for future cooperation and improvements. For example, the Nepal-India Regional Trade
and Transport Project facilitated policy dialogue and agreements between the two governments to
automate and streamline procedures.

33.      The program strongly featured policy operations with at least one DPC each year from FY17-
24, including three in FY19 and two per year in FY20, FY21, and FY24. The DPCs supported GoN’s policy
reforms and priorities, addressing key policy issues with the aim to aid the GRID transition and
strengthen fiscal, financial sector, and sectoral (i.e., energy sector) governance systems. The ongoing
GRID DPC series anchor GoN’s transition to more sustainable, efficient, climate-resilient, and inclusive
green growth. The Fiscal DPC series that concluded in FY24 supported GoN in strengthening the
regulatory and institutional framework to protect the most vulnerable and support sustainable
business growth while advancing GRID. The F4G DPC series supports GoN in strengthening financial
sector stability and resilience, diversifying financial solutions, including green finance, and increasing
access to financial services. Through the F4G DPC, IFC and WB helped GoN implement key 2018 Nepal
Country Private Sector Diagnostic recommendations, such as a more flexible application of the interest
rate cap on external commercial borrowings. Overall, reforms initiated with DPC support have been
sustained.

34.     IFC expanded its program to address key development gaps, amid COVID-19’s impact on
private investment. Its investment portfolio grew from US$45 million in FY18 to US$566 million,

                                                                                                        8
including mobilization, as of June 30, 2024. Between FY19 and FY24, IFC committed US$631.4 million
in long-term financing, including mobilization, and utilized an additional US$109.3 million in blended
finance to de-risk and enhance the bankability of a private equity fund and two hydropower projects.
Concessional funds were co-invested alongside IFC investments as senior debt, subordinated debt,
and/or equity. IFC’s main additionality was both financial (particularly longer tenor financing and
resource mobilization) and non-financial (knowledge, innovation, and capacity building). For example,
to better support SMEs, IFC introduced green financing and foreign currency syndication in
commercial banks. Collaborating with eight other Development Finance Institutions (DFIs), IFC was
the lead arranger for a US$453 million financing package to UT-1, a 216 MW hydropower plant – one
of the largest foreign direct investment (FDI) projects in Nepal. IFC also leveraged advisory services
(AS) and upstream interventions across sectors, notably finance, hydro, environmental, social, and
governance (ESG) practices, agribusiness, and tourism. IFC’s advisory portfolio includes 19 ongoing
projects budgeted at US$8.9 million. Over the CPF period, eight AS projects were completed, of which
seven had positive Development Effectiveness ratings (see Annex 6).

35.      MIGA’s gross outstanding exposure in Nepal was US$87 million as of end-June 2024. This
exposure is driven by a MIGA guarantee that supports the development, construction, operation, and
maintenance of UT-1. MIGA applied its breach of contract guarantee instrument to support FDI in UT-
1. UT-1 is aligned with MIGA’s Strategy and Business Outlook FY18-20, which sought to promote FDI
in IDA countries and support climate finance projects. For this project, MIGA worked with the WB,
utilizing the IDA Private Sector Window, as well as with IFC, a reflection of a strong ‘One WBG’
approach. MIGA is currently exploring additional projects in renewable energy.

36.      ASAs helped bridge knowledge gaps, inform policy reforms, and create a base for WBG work
on inclusion and resilience. ASAs sought to address knowledge gaps related to jobs, strengthening
local governments, poverty, and natural resource management identified in the SCD. The 2022 Public
Expenditure Review (PER) provided reform recommendations that were promoted through the Fiscal
DPCs. The 2024 PEFA assessment will inform the PFM strategy for all tiers of government, DP
interventions, and the next phase of PFM MDTF support. An assessment of social protection systems,
the Human Development PER, and the Human Capital Review informed project design and
implementation. With DPs, WB set up the Federalism Support Platform to address gaps in the design
and implement policy and regulatory frameworks for fiscal federalism. An ongoing GRID PASA anchors
the shift to operationalize GRID as the national development vision. The Nepal Country Climate and
Development Report (CCDR) strengthened the basis for investment and policy decisions in support of
the Paris Agreement and informed WBG’s lending and policy dialogue. The Disaster Risk Financing
Strategy is expected to help streamline access to timely resources during emergencies by pre-
arranging financing, plans, and systems. Findings from the Crisis Preparedness Gap Analysis are being
discussed with GoN, the private sector, and others to bolster preparedness and response efforts.
Overall, WBG engaged on and disseminated the findings of ASAs. However, core ASAs could have been
sequenced better. More than five years lapsed between extended core ASAs like the Financial Sector
Assessment Program and Fiduciary Assessment, limiting their ability to inform the program.

37.     Overall, the WBG deepened its engagement in the five thematic shifts introduced in the PLR,
although progress varied.27 The WBG supported GoN’s COVID-19 response by restructuring and
repurposing funds from several projects, financing vaccine procurement (including the first 2 million
doses used to vaccinate frontline workers), conducting analytical work to assess vaccine rollout
readiness, and preparing a communications strategy for vaccine uptake. These efforts contributed to
Nepal’s high COVID-19 vaccination rates. WBG’s COVID-19 Nepal Business Pulse Survey provided

27
  WBG validated the PLR and the thematic shifts through broad consultations, including with federal and subnational governments and a
Public Perception Survey reaching 1,000 respondents.



                                                                                                                                   9
insights into the pandemic’s impact on SMEs. IFC supported commercial bank and private equity fund
clients to help MSMEs weather the pandemic’s impact, and IFC advisory projects supported the
tourism industry’s recovery. The WB portfolio also evolved to strongly reflect GRID objectives and
efforts to strengthen fiscal federalism and improve human capital outcomes. While several projects
supported the adoption of digital technologies for better public service delivery, changes in GoN’s
stance on its implementation arrangements stalled the now-canceled DNA project. Similarly,
conflicting views among government agencies on GoN priorities and implementation modalities
prevented the materialization of the proposed Unlocking Human Capital for a Prosperous Nepal
Project.

38.      Internal WBG collaboration was complementary and productive but can be strengthened.
This collaboration delivered key policy reforms for private investments through DPCs and ASAs. UT-1
was jointly supported by IDA/Private Sector Window, a MIGA guarantee, and IFC’s advisory, equity
investment, and loan facilities. WBG also collaborated on the CCDR. Opportunities for more WBG
collaboration exist in sectors like renewable energy, digital, tourism, urban development, and
transport. One MIGA staff member is now based in New Delhi, co-located with WB teams, and covers
South Asia, enhancing the potential for collaboration.

39.     CPF implementation was characterized by strong collaboration and coordination with DPs
to improve development effectiveness. Dialogue and engagement were robust with DPs across
sectors. The FCNA, jointly undertaken with UNDP and financed by the UK and SDC, provided
recommendations on the institutional and functional needs of the newly elected SNGs. To support
investment in human capital, WB contributed through PforRs in health and education, together with
other DPs. WB also enhanced its engagement with DPs at the strategic level. It also led DPs in
supporting GoN’s GRID ambitions by helping establish a Nepal GRID Partnership Platform and develop
the GRID SAP. The SAP defines a multi-sector program to drive an economy-wide shift to a GRID path
and outlines external financing from major DPs for ten priority transitions over 10 years. To better
support private sector development, IFC fostered partnerships with DFIs active in Nepal. These
partnerships have enabled greater policy advocacy through platforms like the DFI-DP Working Group,
increased financing for investment projects across sectors (e.g., private equity, hydro, and banks), and
expanded IFC’s advisory program across sectors with funding from donors.

40.      Project implementation slowed down significantly. The disbursement ratio from FY19 to
FY22 heavily relied on EHRP, masking limited disbursements in other projects. Approved in response
to the 2015 earthquakes as an emergency response, US$700 million was provided through two
additional financings. EHRP’s emergency nature and ring-fenced implementation arrangements, along
with a relatively stable core project team supported by specialized consulting services, contributed to
rapid service delivery and high disbursements. Following its closure, the disbursement ratio for
investment projects dropped from 23.7 percent in FY19 to 9.2 percent in FY23 and further
deteriorated to 8.8 percent in FY24. Implementation is affected by frequent government changes,
rapid turnover of civil servants and project staff, slow decision-making largely stemming from a fear
of oversight agencies, procurement delays in large infrastructure projects (e.g., in the transport
sector), inadequate focus on readiness criteria (e.g., the DNA Project (which had to be fully canceled),
transport sector projects, water project, and forestry project), and low SNG implementation capacity
(e.g., water governance and urban governance). Most projects approved during the CPF period did
not consistently meet project readiness criteria before board approval, mainly due to the pressure to
deliver what was programmed for the fiscal year. This led to long delays before their first
disbursements.

41.     Despite WB’s multipronged approach to overcome systematic implementation bottlenecks,
challenges persist. WB worked closely with GoN to address systemic implementation issues through


                                                                                                     10
Annual Portfolio Performance Reviews, escalating high-level issues, and building capacity on WB
financial and procurement policies and E&S risks. WB also pursued proactive cancellations where
required (full: DNA project, partial: Rural Economic Enterprise Development Project and COVID-19
Project to name a few). Despite a strong in-country presence of 90 percent of TTLs and/or co-TTLs to
provide implementation support, overall implementation lagged. Projects were generally
underprepared and ambitious and implementing agencies at SNGs remain nascent with weak
institutional capacity. Moreover, the lack of GoN ownership of procurement reforms, limited use of
the e-GP System, weak procurement capacity and planning, and slow procurement of technical
assistance firms to plug capacity gaps led to implementation delays across the portfolio. The lowest
bidders were often awarded contracts without applying the procurement tools available to address
abnormally low bids. E&S risk management is constrained by weak capacity and GoN’s unwillingness
to address inadequate staffing. There is also no comprehensive regulatory framework to manage
grievances from local communities that may result in lack of adequate redress mechanism and non-
compliance with World Bank standards.

                           IV.     ALIGNMENT WITH CORPORATE GOALS

Alignment with the Twin Goals

42.     The CPF program was well aligned with the twin goals of reducing poverty and boosting
shared prosperity in a sustainable manner. All Focus Areas contributed to building a foundation for
shared prosperity. Under Focus Area 1, WBG interventions sought to improve expenditure and
revenue management for fiscal decentralization, which is crucial for SNGs to conduct their core service
delivery functions. Focus Area 2 focused on improving Nepal’s competitiveness and creating an
enabling environment for private sector investments through improvements in access to electricity
and connectivity. Under Focus Area 3, interventions supported equal opportunities in human capital
development, especially in education, to better equip the poor and vulnerable to participate in the
economy. Interventions also helped strengthen their resilience to the impacts of shocks.

43.      Nepal updated its official poverty data in early 2024, after a 12-year gap. Poverty estimates
were delayed due to the weak legal framework governing data production and utilization, and
inconsistent government funding for official statistics. Delays and gaps in data impacted the WBG’s
work in Nepal. For instance, the latest figures on poverty and labor were not available when the 2018
SCD and 2021 Nepal Light Poverty Assessment were conducted. Nonetheless, the recently released
Fourth Nepal Living Standards Survey) shows the country has made remarkable improvements in living
standards over the last decade – average real per capita consumption went up by 66 percent, with
larger gains at the bottom of the income distribution. The poverty rate decreased from 25.16 percent
in 2011 to 3.57 percent in 2023 (when using the poverty line from 2011). These large gains and the
12-year gap since the last survey motivated Nepal to raise the minimum welfare threshold for
measuring poverty. The new poverty line increases the real value of the poverty threshold by 70
percent and shows that 20.27 percent of the population lives in poverty. A decomposition of the key
drivers of poverty reduction completed for the 2024 streamlined SCD shows that remittances and non-
agricultural wage income are most significantly associated with poverty reduction in Nepal. While
WBG’s investment portfolio does not directly support these key drivers, investments in human capital
and infrastructure connectivity (areas with improvements over the last decade) are important
complementary investments that likely underpin the observed poverty reduction. However, much
remains to be done to foster poverty reduction and equitable growth across the country. NLSS-IV is a
key milestone for evidence-based policy action in Nepal, especially in the federal context, with
provincial poverty estimates being made available for the first time. Going forward, WBG will continue
to work with DPs and GoN to build on this to strengthen the country’s data ecosystem.



                                                                                                    11
Corporate Commitments

44.     Progress has been made in mainstreaming gender in the Nepal portfolio. The program
achieved a 100 percent gender tag for projects and Nepal made significant efforts to implement the
South Asia Regional Gender Action Plan’s recommendations. Overall, WBG operations helped narrow
gender gaps and demonstrated stronger development outcomes for both men and women, especially
sector-specific outcomes.

45.    The Nepal program achieved 100 percent compliance with Citizen Engagement (CE)
requirements throughout the CPF period through stringent periodic CE monitoring and the reporting
of beneficiary feedback. This was facilitated by citizen participation in decision-making bodies,
Grievance Redress Mechanisms, and Citizen Satisfaction Surveys, and social audits. TA and ASAs for
the FY20 portfolio-wide CE assessment and the Federalism Filter on CE have improved the quality of
CE mechanisms and their integration with CE country systems in the federal context.

46.     Climate considerations are reflected throughout the portfolio and the program performed
well on Climate Co-Benefits (CCB) and supported Nepal’s second Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) and the transition to GRID. Climate adaptation and mitigation were
mainstreamed in project design and implementation through the CCB and Paris Alignment. From
FY18-24, Nepal achieved an average of 34 percent CCB for 37 projects, including IPFs and DPCs, above
the corporate target of 28 percent. The CCDR, TA via the Climate Support Facility TF for NDC
implementation, the GRID DPC series, and IFC’s climate finance supported the climate agenda. More
than 50 percent of IFC’s advisory portfolio as of FY24 is climate focused. Supported by the F4G DPC,
IFC also helped establish the Environmental and Social Risk Management Framework for Nepal’s
financial sector.

                                                       V.         LESSONS LEARNED

47.    The design and implementation of the CPF FY19-24 offer lessons that can inform the next
CPF and future operations. Key lessons are presented below, while operations-specific lessons are in
Annex 2.

48.      Lesson 1: Greater prioritization and selectivity should be pursued, considering Nepal’s
political economy challenges, federalism transition, and absorptive and implementation capacity,
with a focus on long-term institutional strengthening. The portfolio grew considerably but was not
accompanied by adequate improvements in implementation, coordination mechanisms, and
procurement planning across all government tiers. Despite progress in transitioning to federalism,
SNGs grapple with low capacity, weak ownership of projects, and unclear mandates. Going forward,
while WB should consider innovative ways to address implementation capacity gaps, it should also
leverage existing resources. These include (a) Practice Group-Country Management Unit expertise to
keep project design simple, (b) strict adherence to the project Readiness Filter, (c) strong DP advocacy
for more capacity-building efforts by the federal government, and (d) sustained strong in-country
presence of TTLs to effectively support PIUs/PMUs and improve engagement across teams to address
procurement and E&S issues. Further, the mismatch between the portfolio’s expansion and GoN’s
implementation capacity suggests that Nepal may have reached its absorptive capacity.28 This
warrants a candid assessment of the risks related to future expansion, favoring a more cautious
approach with greater prioritization and selectivity. Project selection should rely on reliable and
verifiable indicators of improvements in implementation capacity and a more mature federal
transition. For projects that are then selected, more frequent risk assessments – including of political

28
     Absorptive capacity is a country's ability to effectively utilize external resources for development goals and sustainably managing projects.



                                                                                                                                              12
economy challenges – and mitigation plans can enable more proactive measures to effectively address
implementation challenges.

49.      Lesson 2: The results architecture should be more realistic and focus on both public and
private sector interventions, supported by investment in data generation capacity. The results
framework could have aligned better with WBG engagement, more realistically considered
interventions’ impact, and identified outcome indicators reported post-project closure, including the
sustainability and impact of DPC-supported reforms. Nepal’s weak data ecosystem made it difficult to
track and verify indicators not associated with WBG projects, including process-oriented indicators
not linked to program outcomes. Some objectives were complicated by the inclusion of multiple sub-
indicators that remained too ambitious. A better balance between public and private sector-related
indicators as well as the number of indicators supporting each objective would have also improved
the results framework. Avoiding these limitations should be considered while developing the results
framework for the forthcoming CPF. Further, supporting Nepal’s data generation capacity should be
prioritized, including through better sequenced and demand-driven ASAs in collaboration with WB
regional and global teams, DPs, and GoN.

50.      Lesson 3: Sustained engagement with DPs is key to improving program effectiveness. WBG
deepened its strategic and sectoral engagement with DPs, leading efforts to elevate DP coordination
from information sharing to upstream strategic engagement. Together with the German Embassy, WB
led the harmonization of DPs’ immediate COVID-19 relief. Building on this, WB and the UK co-led the
DP GRID Task Team to support the MoF’s GRID Platform. Further, ADB and WB, who together
contribute around 70 percent of the total official development assistance Nepal receives, are well
coordinated in their programs. As ADB and WB have a joint approach in preparing their upcoming
country strategies, there is an opportunity to further increase the impact and scale of their support
through deeper collaboration. Regular sectoral dialogue, including via DP working groups and co-
financing, has helped to collectively troubleshoot some implementation issues and should be
prioritized in the next CPF.

51.       Lesson 4: Scaling up the ‘One WBG’ approach, including IFC’s and MIGA’s programs, requires
stronger cooperation, flexibility, and innovative solutions. Nepal needs substantial resources and
investment to achieve its development goals, beyond what the public sector can alone provide. Strong
IFC-WB collaboration and partnership with GoN have been key in delivering financing and advisory
support to private sector clients and improving the business environment through reforms. Examples
of the ‘One WBG’ approach in practice include (a) complementary IFC-WB ASAs, such as the Provincial
Investment Climate Assessment and (b) UT-1, which engaged WB, IFC, and MIGA. Enhancing
coordination through such initiatives will allow WBG to explore more opportunities, such as public-
private partnerships, to crowd in private capital. Leveraging innovative approaches requires internal
flexibility and increased support for private sector clients. For example, combining or sequencing
advisory services and investments proved successful in recent IFC transactions. This approach was
used to set standards for large private hydro projects (UT-1), the first-ever green trade finance facility
in Nepal and globally (Global IME Bank), and Nepal’s first-ever foreign currency syndicated loan
(Siddhartha Bank). Assessing the likely realization of IFC’s long-term pipeline under various economic
scenarios is also critical, as some key projects did not materialize during the CPF period. For instance,
early hydro projects’ viability was affected by prolonged negotiations with the off taker, delays due to
E&S sensitivities, and lack of internationally experienced sponsors in Nepal. COVID-19 also hindered
overall business development efforts, leading to an adjustment of IFC’s initial investment target of
US$800 million-1.2 billion to US$550-600 million at the PLR stage. Further, to address the gap between
policy formulation and implementation, the next CPF should also support building GoN capacity in
promoting and facilitating private investments.



                                                                                                       13
            CLR Annex 1: Summary of Progress on Nepal FY19-24 CPF Results Matrix

CPF Outcome                                                                      Status at CLR   Overall Rating
Focus Area 1: Public Institutions
Objective 1.1: Improved budget and revenue management
Indicator 1: Proportion of capital expenditure spent in the last quarter of fiscal  Mostly
year                                                                               Achieved
Indicator 2: Tax collections information available on real time basis for federal
                                                                                   Achieved
and provincial levels of government
                                                                                                    Mostly
Indicator 3: Number of provinces incorporating gender informed budget in                           Achieved
                                                                                   Achieved
their plan
Indicator 4: Sub-National Government (SNG) involve citizens in budgetary
                                                                                   Achieved
process
Indicator 5: Consolidated local government public expenditure data available
                                                                                   Achieved
in the public domain
Objective 1.2: Strengthened institutions for public sector management and service delivery
Indicator 1: Number of Local Governments where civil events are registered          Mostly
online                                                                             Achieved
Indicator 2: Percentage improvement in Effective Vaccine Management (EVM)
                                                                                   Achieved         Mostly
Score                                                                                              Achieved
Indicator 3: Percentage of funds disbursed to community schools in
                                                                                   Achieved
compliance with eligibility and utilization guideline
Indicator 4: Number of births registered in Management Information System
                                                                                   Achieved
(MIS) within the first year of birth
Focus Area 2: Private Sector-Led Jobs and Growth
Objective 2.1: Improved power generation capacity and access to electricity
Indicator 1: Additional Generation Capacity in select areas (excluding imports)    Achieved
Indicator 2: Number of people provided with new or improved electricity
                                                                                   Achieved
services in targeted areas.
Indicator 3: Additional generation capacity under construction or operational      Achieved
                                                                                                   Achieved
Indicator 4: High-Voltage Import capacity transmission line completed              Achieved
Indicator 5: Increase access through off grid biogas-based electricity
                                                                                   Achieved
generated
Indicator 6: Increase access through renewable energy-based capacity
                                                                                   Achieved
addition to the national grid
Objective 2.2. Increased transport connectivity, improved maintenance, and road safety
Indicator 1: Percentage of bridges in good and fair condition in targeted           Mostly
routes.                                                                            Achieved
Indicator 2: Percentage of population within 2 and 4 hours of walking distance      Mostly
in the targeted Terai and hill districts                                           Achieved        Partially
                                                                                                   Achieved
                                                                                    Mostly
Indicator 3: Periodic Maintenance of roads within the Core Road Network
                                                                                   Achieved
Indicator 4: Number of Kms on which the Safe Corridor Demonstration
                                                                                 Not Achieved
Program (SCDP) implemented
Objective 2.3. Improved financial sector stability and financial inclusion
Indicator 1: Capital fund coverage of the total insured deposits to strengthen      Mostly
                                                                                                    Mostly
financial system’s safety net.                                                     Achieved        Achieved
Indicator 2: Number of targeted SMEs, agriculture producer groups and
                                                                                   Achieved
individuals with access to finance
Objective 2.4. Improved regulatory environment for competitiveness
Indicator 1: Time needed to meet regulatory requirements for import/export                         Achieved
                                                                                   Achieved
and transit activities


                                                                                                            14
Objective 2.5. Improved income opportunities
Indicator 1: Number of farmers/producer groups increase in sales of value-         Mostly
added products/income in selected value chains                                    Achieved
Indicator 2: Sales of value-added products/income of targeted producer                            Mostly
                                                                                  Achieved       Achieved
groups in selected value chains
Indicator 3: Percent of additional people employed                                Achieved
Indicator 4: Share of female and disadvantaged youth completing market
                                                                                  Achieved
relevant short-term training program
Objective 2.6. Increased Access to Digital Services                                                Not
Indicator 1: Population with access to the internet (as % of population)       Not Achieved      Achieved
Focus Area 3: Inclusion and Resilience
Objective 3.1: Improved equity in access to quality education
Indicator 1: Number of out-of-school children brought to schools or learning
                                                                                  Achieved
centers in most disadvantaged districts (basic grade level 1–8)
Indicator 2: Number of students enrolled in higher education institutions.        Achieved        Mostly
Indicator 3: Percentage of poor students with at least a GPA of 1.6 in 2020                      Achieved
                                                                                    Achieved
Secondary Education Examination (SEE)
Indicator 4: Number of higher education institutions (HEI) with specific            Partially
autonomous academic programs initiated.                                             Achieved
Objective 3.2: Improved access to services and support for the well-being of the vulnerable
groups
Indicator 1: Number of households have access to water and sanitation                Mostly
services in targeted districts/state                                                Achieved
Indicator 2: Children aged 6–23 months, in targeted districts, with minimum                       Mostly
                                                                                    Achieved
acceptable diet (Percentage)                                                                     Achieved
Indicator 3: Number of Gender Based Violence (GBV) survivors have access to          Mostly
justice and support                                                                 Achieved
Indicator 4: Number of pregnant and lactating mothers receiving improved             Mostly
nutrition services and products in targeted areas/state                             Achieved
Objective 3.3: Increased resilience to health shocks, natural disasters, and climate change
Indicator 1: Number of eligible beneficiaries who have access to social security
                                                                                    Achieved
allowance program in selected districts                                                          Partially
Indicator 2: Accuracy and timeliness of weather and flood forecasts and early                    Achieved
                                                                                  Not Achieved
warning dissemination
Indicator 3: Adoption of disaster risk financing and insurance schemes            Not Achieved
Objective 3.4: Improved adoption of sustainable natural resource management
Indicator 1: Increase in number of farmers adopting climate smart agricultural
                                                                                    Achieved
practices in targeted districts/States
Indicator 2: Net Decrease in greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and        Partially
                                                                                                  Mostly
forest degradation                                                                  Achieved
                                                                                                 Achieved
Indicator 3: Number of sub-national land use/spatial plans governing
                                                                                    Achieved
sustainable natural resources use
                                                                                    Partially
Indicator 4: Additional ha of degraded forest rehabilitated.
                                                                                    Achieved




                                                                                                         15
                                                       CLR Annex 2: Detailed Evaluation of the Nepal FY19-24 CPF Results Matrix29


             Objectives/Indicator                               Status at CLR Review                       Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                 WBG Instruments

                                                                                              Focus Area 1: Public Institutions

CPF Objective 1.1: Improved budget and revenue management
Rating: Mostly Achieved


Indicator 1.1.1: Proportion of capital                  Mostly Achieved                                Indicator 1.1.1 revised its target from 65 percent to 40     Projects Closed by End of CPF
expenditure spent in the last quarter                                                                  percent during the PLR with the aim for better results.      • First Fiscal Reforms DPC
of fiscal year (Revised)                                Actual (Jun. 2024): 49%                                                                                       (P160792, IDA Cr.6195-NP,
                                                                                                       The revised target is ambitious for two key reasons:           US$200 million)
Baseline: 75% (2018)                                    Source: Programmatic Fiscal and                                                                             • Second Programmatic Fiscal
                                                        PFM DPC                                        First, the interventions supported under the Bank              and PFM DPC-II (P168869, IDA
Target: 40% (2024)                                                                                     operations affect actual capital spending only up to a         Cr. 6440-NP, US$100 million)
                                                        Financial Comptroller General                  certain extent and need time for the outcomes to             • Integrated Public Financial
Status at PLR: 54.9%                                    Office (FCGO) Government Data                  materialize. The interventions do not account for              Management Reform Project
                                                        (Used to calculate the proportion              behavioral factors, most importantly slow decision-making.     (TA) (P164783, TF0A7474 &
                                                        of capital expenditure spent in the                                                                           TF0A7475, US$9 million)
                                                        last quarter of the fiscal year 2023)          Second, external shocks (COVID-19 and the FY23 revenue       • Nepal Programmatic Fiscal
                                                                                                       shock) have limited improvements in the bunching of            Policy for Growth, Recovery
                                                                                                       spending.                                                      and Resilience DPC (P173982,
                                                                                                                                                                      IDA- Cr. 6902 NP, US$150
                                                                                                       Suggestion: The forthcoming CPF should consider these          million)
                                                                                                       factors when formulating indicators.
                                                                                                                                                                    Projects Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                                                    • Nepal Urban Governance and
Indicator 1.1.2: Tax collections                        Achieved                                       Indicator 1.1.2 was recalibrated during PLR to limit its       Infrastructure Project
information available on real time                                                                     scope to federal and provincial governments. The rationale     (P163418, IDA Cr. 6778-NP,
basis for federal and provincial levels                 Actual (Jun. 2024): 100% of tax                was to make realistic target that is commensurate to the

  29
       Data cutoff: June 30, 2024, with some projects collecting data only until their closure date.



                                                                                                                                                                                               16
         Objectives/Indicator                    Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                   WBG Instruments

of government (Revised)                    collection information available on   limited interventions supported by the Bank.                    US$150 million)
                                           real-time basis for federal and
Baseline: 90% of tax collections           provincial levels of government.      Suggestion: The forthcoming CPF should consider these         ASA Completed by End of CPF
available with a lag of two months                                               factors when formulating indicators.                          • Nepal Fiscal Federalism
                                           Source: Programmatic Fiscal and                                                                       (Transition) (P165688)
Target: 90% of tax collections available   PFM DPC                                                                                             • Nepal Fiscal Policy Analysis and
on real-time basis (2024)                  Financial Comptroller General                                                                         Management Program
                                           Office Revenue Management                                                                             (P157724)
Status at PLR: Target met for provincial   Information System (RIMS) – daily                                                                   • Programmatic Federalism
(100%) and federal government (100%)       updates on federal government                                                                         Support Platform (P168170)
                                           tax collection                                                                                      • Support for Fiscal Management
                                                                                                                                                 (P160712)
                                           Provincial Revenue Management                                                                       • Nepal Federalism Transition
                                           Information System data is not                                                                        Support (P165942)
                                           publicly available but was a prior                                                                  • Federalism Capacity Needs
                                           action under the Fiscal and PFM                                                                       Assessment (P168504)
                                           DPC series, which was validated by                                                                  • Urban Governance and
                                           the Bank’s legal team. The system                                                                     Federalism (P165231)
                                           continues to be operational in all                                                                  • Nepal FCI Policy Engagement
                                           seven provinces.                                                                                      (P168914)
                                                                                                                                               • Macro Monitoring and Analysis
Indicator 1.1.3: Number of provinces       Achieved                              Sustainable capacity-building mechanism is crucial for          FY19 (P152522)
incorporating gender informed budget                                             program effectiveness. Under IPFMRP, based on the             • Macro Monitoring and Analysis
in their plan (Revised)                    Actual (Jun. 2024): 7 provincial      Standardized Training Module on Gender Responsive               FY20 (P172106)
                                           governments adopted gender-           Budgeting significantly contributed to scaling up capacity-
                                                                                                                                               • Debt Reform Plan Nepal
Baseline: 0 (2018)                         informed aspects in their budget.     building activities through various platforms.
                                                                                                                                                 (P170679)
                                                                                                                                               • FY18 Nepal Development
Target: 7 adopt gender-informed            Source: Programmatic Fiscal and       Government ownership is a prerequisite for program
                                                                                                                                                 Updates (P165663)
aspects in the budget (2024)               PFM DPC                               success. The Ministry of Federal Affairs and General
                                                                                                                                               • Policy Notes for the new
                                                                                 Administration (MoFAGA) coordinated and organized a
                                                                                                                                                 Government (P166154)
Status at PLR: Target of 7 expected to     Sources for each province: Koshi,     specific orientation session to scale up capacity-building
                                                                                                                                               • Partnership for Knowledge
be achieved in FY22 based on the           Madhesh, Bagmati, Gandaki,            through DP-supported programs.
                                                                                                                                                 Based Poverty Reduction and
progress made and work plan, subject       Lumbini, Karnali, Sudurpaschim
                                                                                                                                                 Shared Prosperity in Nepal
to situation allowed by COVID-19                                                 Suggestion: There is a need to mainstream sustainable

                                                                                                                                                                            17
         Objectives/Indicator                     Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                 WBG Instruments

                                                                                  capacity-building mechanisms in the Bank’s interventions       (P163078)
                                                                                  to the greatest extent possible rather than only providing   • Nepal Light Poverty
                                                                                  stand-alone training.                                          Assessment 2021 (P175443)
                                                                                                                                               • Macro Monitoring and Analysis
                                                                                                                                                 (P174718)
Indicator 1.1.4: Sub-National               Achieved                              Intra- government Coordination Mechanism can go a long       • Nepal Public Expenditure
Government (SNG) involve citizens in                                              way to resolve implementation bottlenecks. The absence         Review (P172086)
budgetary process (Revised)                 Actual (Jun. 2024): 56% of 739        of an effective PFM Reform Coordination Mechanism for        • Public Expenditure and
                                            municipalities include NGOs, user     the three tiers of government created challenges. The          Financial Accountability (PEFA)
Baseline: Not established (2018)            committees, cooperatives and          project struggled to coordinate provincial and local           Assessment (P175522)
                                            other community organizations         governments’ implementation of the Citizen Engagement
Target: 50% of SNG involve citizens in      inputs in the local level plans and   Strategy recommendations.                                    ASA Active at End of CPF
one or more stages of the budgetary         budgets.                                                                                           • Nepal Subnational Public
process (2024)                                                                    Suggestion: Strongly advocate for the development of an        Expenditure and Financial
                                            Source: Data corresponds to           effective PFM Reform Coordination Mechanism.                   Accountability (PEFA)
Status at PLR: Estimated at least 700       MoFAGA’s Local Institution and                                                                       Assessment in Gandaki
SNGs (92% of total SNGs – 753 Local +       Self-Assessment (LISA) Indicator                                                                     Province (P180249)
7 Provincial) involve citizens in one or    3.2.4 findings for FY2                                                                             • Nepal Fiscal Federalism
more stages of the budgetary process,       2 (latest available data)                                                                            Advisory Support Program
which is yet to be validated through                                                                                                             (P175376)
survey planned by MoFAGA.


Indicator 1.1.5: Consolidated local         Achieved                              Suggestions: An offline module of SuTRA should be
government public expenditure data                                                developed, as several local governments still struggle to
available in the public domain (New)        Actual (Jun. 2024): Consolidated      maintain updated accounts due to connectivity issues.
                                            data for all provincial and local
Baseline (2018): No consolidated            governments available in the          The Bank needs to coordinate with DPs supporting SuTRA
reporting of data                           public domain.                        enhancements to align efforts to develop of a fully
                                                                                  Integrated Financial Management Information System
Target (2024): Consolidated data for all    Source: Public expenditure data       (IFMIS).
provincial and local, as well as for each   from FCGO’s latest report for
province and each locality reported on      FY22-23 based on NPSAS                The Bank, together with all relevant stakeholders, also
an annual basis.                            standards (available in Nepali)       needs to support local governments in publishing their

                                                                                                                                                                             18
         Objectives/Indicator                     Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                 WBG Instruments

                                                                                annual financial statements.
Status at PLR: An information system
is in operation at the provincial level                                         There is also a need for a robust PFM reform coordination
that should enable reporting at the                                             mechanism to effectively bring the required agencies and
provincial level. Sub-National Treasury                                         governments together.
Regulatory Application (SuTRA) is
currently being rolled out (already at
over 730 local level) and should
facilitate reporting for each locality by
2024.

                                            Additional Evidence Objective 1.1: N/A


CPF Objective 1.2: Strengthened institutions for public sector management and service delivery
Rating: Mostly Achieved


Indicator 1.2.1. Number of Local            Mostly Achieved                     Building institutions work best within a programmatic         Projects Closed by End of CPF
Governments where civil events are                                              approach. In this phase, SP interventions focused on and       • Nepal Health Sector
registered online. (Revised)                Actual (Jun. 2024): 738 Local       was successful in strengthening core systems of delivery to        Management Reform
                                            Governments                         improve efficiency and access.                                     (PforR) (P160207, IDA Cr.
Baseline: 72 Local Governments                                                                                                                     5913-NP, US$150 million)
(December 2017)                             The remaining 30 wards under 15     Suggestion: The next SP operation needs to look at             • Nepal School Sector
                                            Local Governments have              improving the impact of SP the benefits and services on            Development Program
Target: 753 Local Governments (2024)        infrastructure and connectivity     poverty alongside continuing to strengthen the systems.            (P160748, IDA Cr. 5971-NP,
                                            challenges.                                                                                            US$185 million)
Status at PLR: 227 Local Governments                                                                                                           • School Sector Development
                                            Total number of civil events                                                                           Program AF (GPE) (P167047,
                                            registered online during the CPF                                                                       TF0B0095, US$23.96
                                            period (Jul 2019-March 2024): 5.3                                                                      million)
                                            million (5,269,624)                                                                                • COVID 19 School Sector
                                                                                                                                                   Program (GPE) (P174209,
                                            Source: Strengthening Systems for                                                                      TF0B3579, US$10.8 million)
                                            Social Protection and Civil

                                                                                                                                                                        19
         Objectives/Indicator                Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                   WBG Instruments

                                       Registration Project                                                                                •    Additional Financing for
                                                                                                                                                Nepal Health Sector
                                                                                                                                                Management Reform
Indicator 1.2.2: Percentage            Achieved                             Prioritizing maintenance ensures the sustainability of              Program for Results
improvement in Effective Vaccine                                            investments. While significant investments continue to be           (P176694, IDA Cr. 6911-NP,
Management (EVM) Score                 Actual (Jun. 2024): 82.2% with 7     made in strengthening the vaccine management system,                US$50 million)
                                       parameters achieving 80%             the hardware and software (personnel related)                 •    Additional Financing to SSDP
Baseline: Average EVM score of 64%                                          investments for the routine maintenance and repairs of             (P176616, IDA-6904, US$50
with 2 parameters achieving 80%        Source: EVM Survey 2021              such systems are constrained, limiting the productivity and        million)
(2018)                                                                      life of these investments.                                    •    Strengthening Systems for
                                       The 2021 EVM Survey is the                                                                              Social Protection and Civil
Target: Average EVM Score of 80%       endline survey that determines       Safe and effective management and disposal of vaccine              Registration (P154548, IDA
with any 6 parameters achieving 80%    the results attributable to the      waste is a chronic challenge and continues to be a lagging         Cr. 5912-NP, US$114.51
(2024)                                 Nepal Health Sector Management       priority in terms of hardware investments, training,               million)
                                       Reform Program. No other             accountability setting, and reporting/monitoring.             •    Nepal Livestock Sector
Status at PLR: Average EVM Score       surveys have been conducted                                                                             Innovation (P156797, IDA Cr.
82.2% with 7 parameters achieving      after 2021.                          Suggestion: Supporting better medical waste disposal               6149-NP, US$80 million)
80% (EVM Survey 2021)                                                       practices should be explored
                                                                                                                                          Projects Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                          • Nurturing Excellence in
Indicator 1.2.3: Percentage of funds   Achieved                             Suggestion: Capacity-building for improved coordination           Higher Education (P171516,
disbursed to community schools in                                           among the tiers of government and timely monitoring and           IDA-68840, US$60 million)
compliance with eligibility and        Actual (Jun. 2024): 99.90%           reporting while activating the Federalism Filter is needed.   • School Sector
utilization guidelines (Revised)                                                                                                              Transformation Program
                                       Source: The 2024 figure is                                                                             (P177647, US$100 million)
Baseline: 92.63% (2016)                calculated based on the                                                                            • Nepal COVID-19 Emergency
                                       cumulative expenditure of SSDP FY                                                                      Response and Health System
Target: 95% (2024)                     2017-22 and the cumulative                                                                             Preparedness Project
                                       ineligible expenditure from the                                                                        (P173760, IDA Cr. 6604-NP,
Status at PLR: 93.56%                  Audited Financial Statements from                                                                      US$29 million)
                                       the Office of the Auditor General.                                                                 • Additional Financing: Nepal
                                                                                                                                              COVID-19 Emergency
                                                                                                                                              Response and Health
Indicator 1.2.4: Number of births      Achieved                             Suggestion: The next Social Protection operation needs to         Systems Preparedness

                                                                                                                                                                       20
        Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review              Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF          WBG Instruments

registered in Management Information                                        continue to strengthen data ecosystems.                   Project (P175848, IDA Cr.
System (MIS) within the first year of   Actual (Jun. 2024): 1,198,931                                                                 6847-NP, US$75 million)
birth (New)                                                                                                                       •   Nepal Quality Health Systems
                                        Source: Strengthening Systems for                                                             Program-for-Results (US$100
Baseline: 7,000 (2018)                  Social Protection and Civil                                                                   million)
                                        Registration Project
Target: 600,000 (2024)                                                                                                            ASA Closed by End of CPF
                                                                                                                                  • Urban Governance and
Status at PLR: 348,340                                                                                                               Federalism (P165231)
                                                                                                                                  • Nepal Federalism Transition
                                                                                                                                     Support (P165942)
                                                                                                                                  • Nepal Fiscal Federalism
                                                                                                                                     (Transition) (P165688)
                                                                                                                                  • Federalism Capacity Needs
                                                                                                                                     Assessment (P168504)
                                                                                                                                  • Health Financing Strategy
                                                                                                                                     Support (P166804)
                                                                                                                                  • Technical Assistance for
                                                                                                                                     Improving Municipal Solid
                                                                                                                                     Waste Management Services
                                                                                                                                     for Urban Local Governments
                                                                                                                                     in Nepal (P169652)
                                                                                                                                  • Addressing Malnutrition and
                                                                                                                                     Investing in Early Years in
                                                                                                                                     Nepal in a federalized
                                                                                                                                     context (P168830)
                                                                                                                                  • Promoting Inclusive Citizen
                                                                                                                                     Participation in Performance
                                                                                                                                     Audits in Nepal (P169375)
                                                                                                                                  • Digital Nepal (P171113)
                                                                                                                                  • Human Development Public
                                                                                                                                     Expenditure Review
                                                                                                                                     (P169010)


                                                                                                                                                             21
         Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                   WBG Instruments

                                                                                                                                            •   Nepal Federalism Platform
                                                                                                                                                2.0 (P175376)
                                                                                                                                            •   Improve Integration of Social
                                                                                                                                                Protection Systems in Nepal
                                                                                                                                                (P168213)

                                                                                                                                            ASA Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                            • Integrated Approach to
                                                                                                                                               Employment and Social
                                                                                                                                               Protection (P170572)
                                                                                                                                            • Accelerating Human Capital
                                                                                                                                               Development in the
                                                                                                                                               Maldives, Nepal, and Sri
                                                                                                                                               Lanka (P177660)


                                         Additional Evidence Objective 1.2: N/A


                                                            Focus Area 2: Private Sector-Led Jobs and Growth

CPF Objective 2.1: Improved power generation capacity and access to electricity
Rating: Achieved


Indicator 2.1.1: Additional Generation   Achieved                            The indicator was revised at PLR to revise the target from     Projects Closed by End of CPF
Capacity in select areas (excluding                                          63MW to 25 MW. This followed the closure of Kabeli A           • Nepal Energy Sector
imports) (Revised)                       Actual (Jun. 2024): 25 MW           project that did not achieve its PDO.                            Development Policy Credit
                                                                                                                                              (P154693, IDA Cr. 6313-NP,
Baseline: 0 (2018)                       Source: Nepal Grid Solar Energy     To achieve the PDO, stringent policy on effective project        US$100 million)
                                         Efficiency Project                  and contract management mechanisms, along with                 • Kabeli-A Hydro Electric Project
Target: Increase by 25 MW (2024)                                             relevant and timely advisory services need to be                 (P122406, IDA Cr. 5338-NP &
                                                                             established for all projects- and particularly for risky and     Gr. H900-NP, US$ 46 million)
Status at PLR: 11.65 MW                                                      transformational projects.


                                                                                                                                                                         22
         Objectives/Indicator                   Status at CLR Review              Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                  WBG Instruments

                                                                                                                                            • Second Energy Sector DPC
                                                                              Complex land acquisition, resettlement, and significant         (P170248, IDA Cr. 6639-NP,
                                                                              procurement challenges may adversely impact project             US$100 million)
                                                                              implementation. The transmission route alignment is           • Nepal Grid Solar and Energy
                                                                              cumbersome should not be a part of the contract. The            Efficiency (P146344, IDA Cr.
                                                                              decision-making process for land acquisition,                   5566-NP, US$130 million)
                                                                              compensation, and forest clearance also needs to be           • Power Sector Reform and
                                                                              streamlined.                                                    Sustainable Hydropower
                                                                                                                                              (P150066, IDA Cr.5728-NP,
                                                                              Suggestions: The Bank should spend more time and                US$20 million)
                                                                              resources working with agencies to manage the                 • Additional Financing Power
                                                                              coordination issues. At present, Inter-ministerial, inter -     Sector Reform and Sustainable
                                                                              agency and inter-department coordination within the             Hydropower (P175306, US$1
                                                                              government is inadequate.                                       million)
                                                                                                                                            • Nepal-India Electricity
                                                                                                                                              Transmission and Trade
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of people         Achieved                                                                                            (P115767, IDA Cr. 4902-NP &
provided with new or improved                                                                                                                 Gr.H660-NP / IDA Cr. 5263-NP
electricity services in targeted areas.   Actual (Jun. 2024): 500,000                                                                         & Gr.H858-NP, US$138 million)
                                                                                                                                            • Sustainable Renewable Energy
Baseline: 55 (2018)                       Source: Nepal Grid Solar and                                                                        Program- Supported Extended
                                          Energy Efficiency Project                                                                           Biogas Project (SREP) (P131592,
Target: 500,000 (2024)                    Database.                                                                                           TF16552, US$7.9 million)

Status at PLR: 19,500                     107,672 households (average                                                                       Projects Active at End of CPF
                                          household size if 4.4) benefitted                                                                 • Upper Trishuli 1 (UT1) –
                                          from improved or new electricity                                                                    Hydropower project (IFC +
                                          services. This is based on the                                                                      MIGA guarantee) (35701)
                                          distribution system built and                                                                       US$87 million in gross
                                          electricity generated from biogas                                                                   outstanding exposure as of
                                          plants and 25 MWp solar plant.                                                                      end-June 2024
                                                                                                                                            • Business Models for Private
                                                                                                                                              Sector -Led Mini-Grid Energy
Indicator 2.1.3: Additional generation    Achieved

                                                                                                                                                                        23
         Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review              Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF               WBG Instruments

capacity under construction or                                                                                                           Access (P149239, TFA8336 &
operational                              Actual (Jun. 2024): 661 MW                                                                      TFA8382, US$7.61 million)
                                                                                                                                       • Plastic Free Rivers and Seas for
Baseline: 0 (2018)                       Source: This number is attributed                                                               South Asia (P171269, US$37
                                         to investment in Upper Trishuli-1                                                               million)
Target: New construction to deliver      Hydro (216 MW) and Nepal Hydro
516 MW (2024)                            Sector Development Advisory                                                                   ASA Closed by End of CPF
                                         Project (445 MW) (IFC)                                                                        • Infrastructure Sector
Status at PLR: 316 MW                                                                                                                    Assessment Program (P165958)
                                         (Upper Trishuli-1 is still under                                                              • Developing Improved Solutions
                                         construction but is expected to                                                                 for Cooking (P149764)
                                         generate 1,427 GWh electricity                                                                • Nepal Hydro Sector
                                         per year.)                                                                                      Development Project (599991)
                                                                                                                                         (IFC)
Indicator 2.1.4: High-Voltage Import     Achieved                                                                                      • Renewable Energy Resource
capacity transmission line completed                                                                                                     Mapping and Geospatial
(New)                                    Actual (Jun. 2024): 85 km 400 kV                                                                Planning (P150328)
                                         cross-border transmission line
Baseline: No high-voltage cross-border   constructed to enhance power                                                                  ASA Active at End of CPF
transmission capacity (2018)             imports (2024)                                                                                • Energy Sector Reform Program
                                                                                                                                         in Nepal (P171183)
Target: 400 kV cross-border              Source: Nepal-India Electricity
transmission line constructed to         Transmission and Trade Project
enhance power imports (2024)             (NIETTP)

Status at PLR: 85 km 400 kV line
operational. 260 MW of electricity was
imported using partially completed
Nepal-India Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project (NIETTP).


Indicator 2.1.5: Increase access         Achieved                            Suggestion: The next CPF should take a holistic look at
through off grid biogas-based                                                complementarities between operations and lending

                                                                                                                                                                     24
         Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                  WBG Instruments

electricity generated (New)              Actual (Jun. 2024): 4.96 GWh/year     instruments. For instance, Indicator 2.1.5 was supported by
                                                                               Nepal Grid Solar and Energy Efficiency, ASA: Nepal Hydro
Baseline: 0 GWh/year (2018)              Source: This is achieved through      Sector Development Project, IFC Renewable Energy
                                         completion of commercial and          Resource Mapping and Geospatial Planning, and Energy
Target: 3.4 GWh/year (2021)              municipal scale biogas projects       Sector Reform Program in Nepal.
                                         developed under Sustainable
Status at PLR: 3.4 GWh/year              Renewable Energy Program-
                                         Supported Extended Biogas
                                         Project (SREP)


Indicator 2.1.6: Increase access         Achieved
through renewable energy-based
capacity addition to the national grid   Actual (Jun. 2024): 25 MW
(New)
                                         Source: Grid Solar Energy
Baseline: 0 MW (2018)                    Efficiency Project

Target: 25 MW (2024)                     The 25 MW is completed and
                                         commissioned and feeding
Status at PLR: 11.65 MW                  electricity into the national grid.


                                         Additional Evidence Objective 2.1: N/A


CPF Objective 2.2: Increased transport connectivity, improved maintenance, and road safety
Rating: Partially Achieved


Indicator 2.2.1: Percentage of bridges   Mostly Achieved                       Ensuring Counterpart Funding during planning stage is         Projects Closed by End of CPF
in good and fair condition in targeted                                         essential to uninterrupted project implementation. This       • Strengthening National Rural
routes.                                  Actual (Jun. 2024): 83%               includes allocation for budgetary resources within LMBIS        Transport Program (SNRTP:
                                                                               for project preparation, including Project Design Reports,      P132759
Baseline: 75% (2018)                     Source: Second Bridges                preliminary environmental and social impact studies, and

                                                                                                                                                                         25
         Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                 WBG Instruments

                                         Improvement and Maintenance          regulatory clearances for utilities and trees. This will     Projects Active at End of CPF
Target: 85% (2024)                       Project                              ensure that project starts to implement soon after           • Second Bridges Improvement
                                                                              effectiveness.                                                 and Maintenance Program
Status at PLR: 79.9%                     This data is taken from the Bridge                                                                  (P161929, IDA Cr. 6317-NP,
                                         Management System (BMS)              Suggestions:                                                   US$133 million)
                                         owned by GoN.                                                                                     • Nepal Strategic Road and Trade
                                                                              Streamline Utility Relocation Process: Develop a               Improvement Project
                                                                              streamlined process for utility relocation to minimize         (P170409, IDA Cr. 6673-NP, IDA
Indicator 2.2.2: Percentage of           Achieved                             project delays caused by the current inefficiencies in         Cr. 6674-NP, US$450 million)
population within 2 and 4 hours of                                            managing this aspect.                                        • Accelerating Transport and
walking distance in the targeted Terai   Actual (Jun. 2024): 12.17%                                                                          Trade Connectivity in Eastern
and hill districts                                                            Establish Clear Guidelines with National Electricity           South Asia – Nepal Phase 1
                                         Source: Strengthening National       Authority (NEA) with respect to WB Projects: Define a          Project (P177902, US$275
Baseline: 0% (2018)                      Rural Transport Program              standardized process for handling World Bank projects          million)
                                                                              with the NEA to avoid case-by-case treatment and
Target: Increase by 4% (2019)                                                 expedite agreement negotiations. This should include         ASA Closed by End of CPF
                                                                              addressing the different perspectives between NEA and        • Infrastructure Sector
Status at PLR: 12.17%                                                         the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and Transport          Assessment Program (InfraSAP)
                                                                              (MoPIT) regarding transmission line upgrades versus            (Transport) (P165958)
                                                                              replacements to prevent unnecessary delays. It should also     (Delivered)
Indicator 2.2.3 (New): Periodic          Mostly Achieved                      include, strengthening communication and coordination        • Support the National Road
Maintenance of roads within the Core                                          between MoPIT and NEA: to ensure alignment of project          Safety Council (NRSC)
Road Network                             Actual (Jun. 2024): 1457 km          objectives and prevent conflicting interpretations.            (P169402)
                                                                                                                                           • Improving Nepal’s Regional
Baseline: 0 lane-km (2020)               Source: Nepal Strategic Road and     Streamline Tree Felling Approval Process: Develop a clear      Transport Connectivity through
                                         Trade Improvement Project            and time-bound process for obtaining cabinet approval          Waterways (P171169; part of a
Target: 1,700 lane-km (2024)                                                  after tree classification and counting, eliminating the        regional activity)
                                                                              current regulatory bottleneck that hinders project           • Nepal Civil Aviation (P171169;
Status at PLR: 0 km                                                           commencement. This should also include improve                 part of a regional activity)
                                                                              transparency and accountability in cabinet clearances for
                                                                              tree filling processes, ensuring timely approvals without    ASA Active at End of CPF
Indicator 2.2.4 (New): Number of kms     Not Achieved                         compromising regulatory compliance. In addition, there is    • Improving Nepal’s Regional
on which the Safe Corridor                                                    a need to foster a collaborative relationship with the         Transport Connectivity through
Demonstration Program (SCDP)             Actual (Jun. 2024): 0 km             Department of Forestry and Soil Conservation (DoFSC) to        Waterways (P171169; part of a

                                                                                                                                                                       26
        Objectives/Indicator         Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                     WBG Instruments

implemented                                                        facilitate smoother project initiation, while adhering to          regional activity)
                               Source: Nepal Strategic Road and    necessary regulatory requirements.                               • Nepal Civil Aviation (P171169;
Baseline: 0 km (2020)          Trade Improvement Project                                                                              part of a regional activity)
                                                                   Establish Material Sourcing Coordination with Local              • Nepal Regional Connectivity
Target: 95 km (2024)                                               Governments: Engage with local governments to                      and Trade Facilitation Aviation
                                                                   coordinate the sourcing of materials such as sand and              (P171169; part of a regional
Status at PLR: 0 km                                                gravel, addressing their perception of priority projects and       activity)
                                                                   ensuring equitable treatment for WB projects. This should
                                                                   also include raising awareness of project benefits at local
                                                                   levels, thereby garnering increased support and
                                                                   cooperation, as well as incorporating local priorities into
                                                                   project planning to align with communities’ needs and
                                                                   minimize potential conflicts over resource allocation.

                                                                   Regularly Review and Update LMBIS Guidelines:
                                                                   Implement a periodic review process for LMBIS guidelines
                                                                   to adapt to evolving project preparation and
                                                                   implementation challenges, incorporating lessons learned
                                                                   from previous projects.

                                                                   Promote a Collaborative Approach with Development
                                                                   Partners: Foster a collaborative environment among
                                                                   various development partners to collectively address
                                                                   common challenges and ensure smooth project execution.

                                                                   Foster Capacity Building and Knowledge Transfer:
                                                                   Facilitate capacity-building initiatives to enhance the skills
                                                                   and knowledge of local officials and stakeholders involved
                                                                   in project preparation and implementation, ensuring a
                                                                   more efficient process overall.

                               Additional Evidence Objective 2.2: N/A




                                                                                                                                                                 27
               Objectives/Indicator                    Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                    WBG Instruments

      CPF Objective 2.3: Improved financial sector stability and financial inclusion
      Rating: Mostly Achieved


      Indicator 2.3.1: Capital fund coverage    Mostly Achieved                        Since Equity Capital is not exclusively earmarked to deposit   Projects Closed by End of CPF
      of the total insured deposits to                                                 and credit exposures, a consolidated assessment of DCGF's      • Third Financial Sector Stability
      strengthen financial system’s safety      Actual (Jun. 2024): 1.6%               leverage capacity is required. Based on current data, DCGF        Credit DPC (P156960, IDA Cr.
      net                                                                              will require substantial capital injection to achieve the         5875-NP, US$100 million)
                                                Source: Provisional Financial          target of 3 percent.                                           • Fourth Financial Sector
      Baseline: Around 0.95% of the total       Reports of the DCGF (available in                                                                        Stability DPC (P159547, IDA
      insured deposits (2018)                   Nepali).                                                                                                 Cr. 6304-NP, US$100 million)
                                                                                                                                                      • Finance for Growth DPC 1
      Target: Increase to 3% of the total       (Capital fund coverage = Total                                                                           (P173044, IDA Cr. 6715-NP,
      insured deposits (2024)                   equity capital and risk funds/Total                                                                      US$ 200 million)
                                                deposits and credit insured)                                                                          • Finance for Growth DPC 2
      Status at PLR: 1.8%                                                                                                                                (P176881, IDA Cr. 7050-NP,
                                                Capital fund coverage (leverage                                                                          US$ 150 million)
                                                ratio) is at 1.6% (as of July 2024),                                                                  • First GRID DPC (P177776, IDA
                                                with DCGF’s Capital Fund of NPR                                                                          Cr. 7190-NP, US$ 100 million)
                                                27.83 billion, while its deposit and                                                                  • Nepal Livestock Sector
                                                credit exposure amount to NPR                                                                            Innovation (P156797, IDA Cr.
                                                1.43 trillion and NPR 38.78 billion,                                                                     6149-NP, US$80 million)
                                                respectively.
                                                                                                                                                      Projects Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                                      • Nirdhan Utthan Laghubitta
      Indicator 2.3.2: Number of targeted       Achieved                               Suggestion: The source of data and formulae for                  Bittiya Sanstha Limited
      SMEs, agriculture producer groups,                                               computation must be noted in the CPF and PLR RF to               (627165) (IFC)
      and individuals with access to finance    (i) SMEs                               ensure consistency in data obtained, especially from           • Sana Kisan Bikas Laghubitta
                                                                                       secondary sources. It takes 12 months (or more) to get           Bittiya Sanstha Ltd. (formerly
(i)       SMEs                                  Actual (Jun. 2024): 63,727 (IFC)       published official data in many instances, which should be       Rural Microfinance
                                                                                       considered while determining indicators.                         Development Centre – RMDC)
      Baseline: 0 (2018)                        Source: Latest client data through                                                                      (641097) (IFC)
      Target: Additional 32,215 (2024)          IFC Reach Survey (2021 and 2023)                                                                      • Global IME Bank (1000476)
      Status at PLR: 27,215 (IFC)                                                                                                                       (IFC)

                                                                                                                                                                                    28
                 Objectives/Indicator              Status at CLR Review              Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                WBG Instruments

                                            (ii) Agriculture Producer Groups                                                                • NMB Nepal (773604) (IFC)
(ii)        Agriculture Producer Groups                                                                                                     • Sanima Bank (1031091) (IFC)
                                            Actual (Jun. 2024): 446                                                                         • Siddhartha Bank (643678) (IFC)
        Baseline: 0 (2018)
        Target: Additional 350 (2024)       Source: Nepal Livestock Sector                                                                   ASA Closed by End of CPF
        Status at PLR: Assessment under     Innovation Project (endline survey                                                              • Policy Note on Agriculture
        progress                            to be made available online soon;                                                                 Finance Strategy (P165645)
                                            hard and soft copies are available)                                                             • Nepal FCI Policy Engagement
(iii)       Individuals                                                                                                                       (P168914)
                                            (iii) Individuals                                                                               • Sustainable Tourism
        Baseline: 0 (2018)                                                                                                                    Development and Value
        Target: Additional 600,000 (2024)   Actual (Jun. 2024): 2,068,195 (IFC)                                                               Creation in Nepal (P167250)
        Status at PLR: 2,108,720 (IFC)                                                                                                      • Women’s Non-Farm
                                            Source: Latest client data through                                                                Employment in Nepal
                                            IFC Reach Survey (2021 and 2022)                                                                  (P172067)
                                                                                                                                            • DIME Agriculture and Irrigation
                                            Note: Indicator 2.3.2 (iii)                                                                       in Nepal (P154309)
                                            Individuals: This fluctuation in the                                                            • Digital Nepal (P171113)
                                            numbers reported for PLR and the
                                                                                                                                            • Post-COVID Private Sector
                                            CLR was the result of various
                                                                                                                                              Recovery TA Program (PSRP)
                                            changes in clients’ reported
                                                                                                                                              (P174486)
                                            portfolios, notably caused by
                                            COVID-19 and its aftermath
                                                                                                                                            ASA Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                            • Nepal Financial Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                              Strengthening Project (604073)
                                                                                                                                              (IFC)


                                            Additional Evidence Objective 2.3:
                                            Non-performing Loans (NPL) ratio rose from 3.0 percent in August 2023 to 4.42 percent in
                                            October 2024.

                                            Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of banks increased marginally from 12.6 percent in December 2023


                                                                                                                                                                         29
         Objectives/Indicator                   Status at CLR Review                 Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                      WBG Instruments

                                          to 12.93 percent in October 2024 – above the minimum requirement of 11 percent.


CPF Objective 2.4: Improved regulatory environment for competitiveness
Rating: Achieved


Indicator 2.4.1: Time needed to meet      Achieved                               Effective governance and institutional capacity-building are      Projects Closed by End of CPF
regulatory requirements for                                                      critical for sustained progress in the trade sector. The          • Nepal India Regional Trade and
import/export and transit activities      Actual (Nov. 2021): 54 hours           World Bank's assistance underscored the need for                    Transport (NIRTTP) (P144335,
                                          (export) and 54 hours (import)         investing in institutions, such as customs, regulatory              IDA Cr. 5273-NP & Gr. H863-
Baseline: 61 hours (2018)                                                        bodies, and trade promotion agencies, to enhance their              NP, US$99 million)
                                          Source: Nepal-India Regional           efficiency, transparency, and effectiveness.
Target: 55 hours (2024)                   Trade and Transmission Project                                                                           Projects Active at End of CPF
                                          (latest data is as of Nov. 2021, has   Infrastructure development, especially in transportation          • Nepal Strategic Road and Trade
Status at PLR: 54 hours (export) and 59   not been monitored since)              and logistics, is essential for facilitating trade. The World       Improvement Project
hours (import)                                                                   Bank's involvement emphasized the significance of                   (P170409, IDA Cr. 6673-NP, IDA
                                                                                 improving roads and border crossings to reduce trade                Cr. 6674-NP, US$450 million)
                                                                                 costs and enhance connectivity with neighboring countries.        • Accelerating Transport and
                                                                                                                                                     Trade Connectivity in Eastern
                                                                                 Targeted trade facilitation measures can promote inclusive          South Asia – Nepal Phase 1
                                                                                 growth by benefiting a wide range of stakeholders, from             Project (P177902, US$275
                                                                                 SMEs to marginalized communities.                                   million)

                                                                                 The World Bank's support in Nepal emphasized the need             ASA Closed by End of CPF
                                                                                 for harmonizing trade-related policies and regulations with       • Sustainable Tourism
                                                                                 India and China, Nepal's largest trading partners, to unlock        Development in Nepal
                                                                                 the full potential of regional trade.                               (P167250)
                                                                                                                                                   • Nepal Market Creation for
                                                                                 Building resilience in the face of external shocks is essential     Tourism Project (602476) (IFC)
                                                                                 for a country's trade sector. Lessons from the World Bank's       • Assessing the Economic Impact
                                                                                 involvement in Nepal emphasized the importance of                   of Protected Areas on Local
                                                                                 contingency planning, diversification of export markets,            Economies [Nepal Case Study in
                                                                                 and building adaptive capacities.                                   global ASA] (P171044)


                                                                                                                                                                               30
         Objectives/Indicator                Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                 WBG Instruments

                                                                            Suggestion: The WBG partnership in Nepal must continue
                                                                            to focus on creating an enabling environment that
                                                                            encourages entrepreneurship, innovation, and private
                                                                            sector investment in trade-related activities.


                                       Additional Evidence Objective 2.4:

                                       The Nepal-India Regional Trade and Transmission Project resulted in (a) simplification,
                                       harmonization, and automation of trade related transactions, (b) adoption of modern
                                       approaches to border management, and (c) the reduction of key infrastructure bottlenecks for
                                       transit, thereby contributing to the achievement of project outcome "decreased transport time
                                       and logistics costs for bilateral trade between Nepal and India and transit trade along the
                                       Kathmandu-Kolkata corridor".

                                       The construction of an integrated check-post on the Raxaul (India)-Birgunj (Nepal) border (not a
                                       direct project output) and the Integrated Customs Depot facilities, along with the technical
                                       activities (mentioned above) resulted in a reduction in delays, costs, and red tape. Border
                                       crossing times at Raxaul-Birgunj significantly reduced from 2.3 days to 0.87 days, significantly
                                       exceeding the target of 1.5 days.


CPF Objective 2.5: Improved income opportunities
Rating: Mostly Achieved


Indicator 2.5.1: Number of             Mostly Achieved                      Building animal health systems is required. Moving from       Projects Closed by End of CPF
farmers/producer groups increase in                                         project-based punctual interventions to the establishment     • Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF)
sales of value-added products/income   Actual (Jun. 2024): 2,943 producer   of systems for animal health is critical to sustainable         AF II (P105860, IDA Gr. H857-
in selected value chains               groups (of which female 42%)         improvements in productivity and incomes. Properly              NP, US$245 million)
                                                                            working animal health systems are also crucial for ensuring   • Enhanced Vocational Education
Baseline: 0 (2018)                      (1359 from Nepal Livestock Sector   food safety and pandemic control.                               and Training II (P163018, IDA
                                       Innovation Project and 1584 from                                                                     Cr. 6142-NP, US$60 million)
Target: Additional 3,290 (of which     Food and Nutrition Security          The engagement of the financing sector through                • Nepal Livestock Sector
female 45%) (2024)                     Enhancement Project (of which        formulation of viable business proposals have

                                                                                                                                                                     31
         Objectives/Indicator                    Status at CLR Review                  Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                  WBG Instruments

                                          female 45%)                              demonstrated that private sector financing in agriculture      Innovation (P156797, IDA Cr.
Status at PLR: 320 (gender-                                                        sector is feasible (e.g., the significant loan and equity      6149-NP, US$80 million)
disaggregated data under analysis)        Source: Nepal Livestock Sector           financing of business proposals supported by NLSIP).         • Food and Nutrition Security
                                          Innovation Project and Food and                                                                         Enhancement (P164319,
                                          Nutrition Security Enhancement           Greater emphasis needs to be placed on capacity of             TF0A8013, US$22.7 million)
                                          Project                                  producer organizations. In terms of business planning and
                                                                                   development, private sector SMEs perform better than the     Projects Active at End of CPF
Indicator 2.5.2: Sales of value-added     Achieved                                 cooperatives and farmers groups due to the complexities      • NP Modernization Rani Jamara
products/income of targeted producer                                               involved in collective action.                                 Kulariya Irrigation Phase II
groups in selected value chains           Actual (Jun. 2024): 91% increase                                                                        (P158364, IDA Cr. 6194-NP,
                                                                                   Suggestion: The segmentation of target beneficiaries           US$60.66 million)
Baseline: 0 % (2018)                      Source: Nepal Livestock Sector           (farmers/producers) is important to customize training and   • Youth Employment
                                          Innovation Project                       capacity development strategy and financing strategy.          Transformation Initiative
Target: Increase by 25% (2024)                                                                                                                    (P160696, IDA Cr. 6487-NP,
                                                                                   Going forward, the results framework/indicators should be      US$120 million)
Status at PLR: Assessment ongoing                                                  more realistic about can be measured based on data           • Rural Enterprise and Economic
                                                                                   readily available.                                             Development Project
                                                                                                                                                  (P170215, IDA Cr. 6787-NP,
Indicator 2.5.3: Percent of additional    Achieved                                 Suggestions: There is a need to ensure increased capacity-     US$80 million
people employed                                                                    building at local levels and the prioritization of           • Forest for Prosperity Project
                                          Actual (Jun. 2024): 82% of those         employment at all levels of government.                        (P170798, TF0B2796 and
Baseline: 0% (2018)                       who completed the short-term                                                                            TF0B2488, US$24 million)
                                          training found employed within six       There is a need to increase engagement between the           • Dedicated Grant Mechanism
Target: Increase by 70% (2024)            months.                                  government and the private sector to increase quality          for Indigenous Peoples and
                                                                                   employment.                                                    Local Communities (P171720,
Status at PLR: 75% (data are for Year 2   Under the Enhanced Vocational                                                                           US$4.5 million)
- FY18-19 of the project)                 Education and Training Project,
                                          about 110,000 youths completed                                                                        ASA Closed by End of CPF
                                          short-term vocational skills                                                                          • Support to Developing an
                                          training in five cohorts. In the fifth                                                                  Inclusive Jobs Strategy for
                                          and final cohort of short-term                                                                          Nepal (P163141) Agriculture
                                          training, 14,475 youth completed                                                                        Investment Plan (Deliverable of
                                          short-term training. Based on                                                                           P176456 – GRID Programmatic
                                          sample-based verification, 82% of

                                                                                                                                                                            32
         Objectives/Indicator                Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                     WBG Instruments

                                       those who completed the short-                                                                         ASA)
                                       term training found employment
                                       within six months.                                                                                   ASA Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                            • Integrated Approach to
                                       Source:                                                                                                Employment and Social
                                       Enhanced Vocational Education                                                                          Protection (P170572)
                                       and Training Project II                                                                              • Nepal Climate-Smart
                                                                                                                                            • Agriculture Fertilizer Dialogue
Indicator 2.5.4: Share of female and   Achieved                              Designing results-based funding activities require intensive     (Deliverable of P176456 – GRID
disadvantaged youth completing                                               monitoring and verification mechanisms in place to ensure        Programmatic ASA)
market relevant short-term training    Actual (Jun. 2024): 78.45%            the credibility of results.                                    • Agriculture Sector PER
program                                                                                                                                       (Deliverable of P176456 – GRID
                                       Source: Enhanced Vocational                                                                            Programmatic ASA)
Baseline: 50% (2018)                   Education and Training Project,       Suggestions: Support for enhancing the employability of
                                       about 110,000 youths completed        youth, women, and marginalized groups needs to
Target: 65% (2024)                     short-term vocational skills          continue. The focus can be on future-oriented
                                       training. In the fifth and final      employability skills, for example, digital literacy and the
Status at PLR: 88%                     cohort, 14,475 youth completed        green skills agenda.
                                       training, of which 78.45% were
                                       either female/disadvantaged
                                       youth.


                                       Additional Evidence Objective 2.5:
                                       1) The Mid-Term Review of YETI reports that 77% of the beneficiaries are poor, with an average
                                          wage income of US$236-437, and over 60% are youth, over 50% women, and around one
                                          third Dalits.
                                       2) Over 132,000 people have received temporary employment through YETI.
                                       3) 5,785 full time jobs created in agriculture through FANSEP and NLSIP. (No baseline, so %
                                          values cannot be provided for NLSIP and FANSEP)
                                       4) Indicator 2.5.2 is defined as the average increase of sales and measured as the mean value of
                                          sales within the individual targeted value chains. The values are calculated after deducting
                                          inflation rate by using CPI calculation from Nepal Rastra Bank, taking base year 2014/15. The
                                          endline sales value after adjusting with the inflation rate in cow/buffalo milk 573.49 thousand

                                                                                                                                                                        33
         Objectives/Indicator                   Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                      WBG Instruments

                                             and goat meat 102.61 thousand has been achieved from the weightage average calculation as
                                             in the case of productivity. Yr 7 data will be updated after the survey. (Data Source: Baseline
                                             survey 2020, AHHS1 2021, AHHS2 2022 and endline survey 2023).


CPF Objective 2.6: Increased Access to Digital Services
Rating: Not Achieved


Indicator 2.6.1: Population with access   Not Achieved                         Implementation capacity and regulatory framework are              Projects Closed by End of CPF
to the internet (as % of population)                                           the prerequisites for accelerated digitalization in Nepal.        • Programmatic Fiscal Policy for
(New)                                     Actual (Jun. 2024): 75%                                                                                  Growth Recovery and
                                          (estimated)                          Project readiness can be improved, but the likelihood of            Resilience DPC (P173982, IDA-
Baseline: 65% (2018)                      The increase in population with      policy reversal (e.g., related to private capital mobilization)     Cr. 6902 NP, US$150 million)
                                          access to internet can be            remains high due to political uncertainties.
Target: 85% (2024)                        attributed to the broader                                                                              Projects Active at End of CPF
                                          digitalization of Nepal’s economy    Intensive technical assistance and capacity-building to           • Digital Nepal Acceleration
                                          and private sector efforts.          improve the policy and regulatory framework is needed               (DNA) Project (P176543,
                                                                               and should be supported by the government’s                         US$140 million) – cancelled in
                                          Source: World Bank estimates         development cooperation policy.                                     FY25
                                          based on data from the global
                                          industry association (GSMA) and      Suggestions: Next CPF should prioritize deeper                    ASA Closed by End of CPF
                                          government data sources (telecom     engagement with all sectoral stakeholders. Private sector         • Digital Nepal (P171113)
                                          regulator)                           can be the driving force in accelerating digitalization.
                                                                                                                                                 ASA Active at End of CPF
                                                                               Source used to monitor and verify progress should be              • Digital Development for
                                                                               identified while formulating the indicator. Data should             Maldives, Nepal, and Sri Lanka
                                                                               preferably be periodically updated and publicly available.          (P175577)
                                                                                                                                                 • Digital for GRID in Maldives,
                                                                                                                                                   Nepal, and Sri Lanka (P177824)
                                                                                                                                                 • Access to Financial Services
                                                                                                                                                   Project (602783) (IFC)




                                                                                                                                                                              34
         Objectives/Indicator                   Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                   WBG Instruments


                                          Additional Evidence Objective 2.6:

                                          Significant investment by private Internet Service Providers (ISPs) in broadband networks have
                                          led to about 40 percent of households being connected to fiber internet in 2023, up from 14
                                          percent in 2019. (Source: Tele Geography Global comms data)

                                          Continuing reforms, combined with the switch to digital transactions, have supported the
                                          increasing use of digital payments and online services. For example, internet and mobile banking
                                          services were used to transfer NPR 2.8 trillion (US$21 billion) in funds in 2023, up from NPR 559
                                          billion in 2020. (Source: Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) data)


                                                                    Focus Area 3: Inclusion and Resilience

CPF Objective 3.1: Improved equity in access to quality education
Rating: Mostly Achieved


Indicator 3.1.1: Number of out-of-        Achieved                              Suggestions: WBG interventions should use a life cycle        Projects Closed by End of CPF
school children brought to schools or                                           approach with a focus on early childhood development,         • Higher Education Reform
learning centers in most disadvantaged    Actual (Jun. 2024): 68.7%             foundational learning with cognitive and other skills,          Project (P147010, IDA 55860,
districts (basic grade level 1-8)         reduction in out-of-school children   teacher/faculty capacity development, research,                 US$65 million)
                                          in 15 most disadvantaged districts    innovation, and entrepreneurship linking with the world of    • School Sector Development
Baseline: 88,875 out-of-school children   (of which 51.8% female)               work – employment and self-employment.                          Program (IDA 59710, US$185
ages 5-16 (of which female 49%)                                                                                                                 million)
(2017)                                    Source: GPE TF, School Sector                                                                       • School Sector Development
                                          Development Program                                                                                   Program GPE (TF0B0095-NP,
Target: 20% reduction from baseline                                                                                                             US$23.96 million)
(of which female 50%) (2024)              This is based on the baseline                                                                       • Additional Financing for SSDP
                                          Survey data of out-of-school                                                                          (P176616, IDA 6904, US$50
Status at PLR: 68.7% reduction in out-    children in 15 most disadvantaged                                                                     million)
of-school children in 15 most             districts (5 in first round, 5 in                                                                   • COVID-19 School Sector
disadvantaged districts (of which         second round, and 5 in the 3rd                                                                        Development Program, GPE
51.8% female)                             round of the Household Survey)

                                                                                                                                                                          35
         Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review           Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF          WBG Instruments

                                         and the student enrollment figures                                                       TF0B3579, US$10.8 million)
                                         in the school of that catchment                                                        • Enhanced Vocational Education
                                         area. This was reported by the                                                           and Training Project II
                                         implementing agency and verified                                                         (P163018, US$60 million)
                                         by the independent verification
                                         agency.                                                                                Projects Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                • Nurturing Excellence in Higher
                                                                                                                                  Education (P171516, IDA-
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of students      Achieved                                                                                 68840, US$60 million)
enrolled in higher education                                                                                                    • School Sector Transformation
institutions.                            Actual (Jun. 2024): 1,350 (female                                                        Program Operation (P177647,
                                         more than 50%)                                                                           US$120 million)
Baseline: 48 students                                                                                                           • School Sector Transformation
                                         Source: Higher Education Reforms                                                         Program Operation, GPE Grant
Target: 1,200 students per year (of      Project (based on enrollment data                                                        TF0C0896-NP, US$ 19.70
which female 45%) (2024)                 in FY20 and in FY23/24 collected                                                         million)
                                         by WB from individual colleges                                                         • GPE System Capacity Grant
Status at PLR: 650                       implementing autonomous                                                                  (US$1.75 million)
                                         programs)
                                                                                                                                ASA Closed by End of CPF
                                                                                                                                • Early Childhood Education
Indicator 3.1.3: Percentage of poor      Achieved                                                                                 Diagnostic (P169661)
students with at least a GPA of 1.6 in                                                                                          • Investing in people to close
2020 Secondary Education                 Actual (Jun. 2024): 75%                                                                  Human Capital Gap for Higher
Examination (SEE) (Revised)                                                                                                       and sustainable inclusive
                                         Source: School Sector                                                                    growth (P168816)
Baseline: N/A (2018)                     Development Program                                                                    • Human Development Public
                                                                                                                                  Expenditure Review (P169010)
Target: 70% (2023)                                                                                                              • EdTech Readiness study
                                                                                                                                  (P177660)
Status at PLR: 70%                                                                                                              • Teaching at the Right level
                                                                                                                                  (TaRL)

Indicator 3.1.4: Number of higher        Partially Achieved                                                                     ASAs Active at End of CPF

                                                                                                                                                            36
         Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                 WBG Instruments

education institutions (HEI) with                                                                                                          • Accelerating Human Capital
specific autonomous academic            Actual (Jun. 2024): 16                                                                               Development in the Maldives,
programs initiated                                                                                                                           Nepal, and Sri Lanka (P177660)
                                        Source: Higher Education Reforms
Baseline: 2                             Project (closed in December
                                        2020).
Target: 25 HEI-specific autonomous
academic programs initiated (2024)      The reported figures are the latest
                                        available (2023/24).
Status at PLR: 14

                                        Additional Evidence Objective 3.1: 6.76% nationwide reduction against the target of 5.60% in
                                        number of out-of-school children.

                                        The ongoing Nurturing Excellence in Higher Education Program (NEHEP) further facilitates
                                        autonomous academic programs. One HEI has been established/ reconstituted as a degree
                                        awarding HEI and another is in the pipeline. NEHEP is also supporting HEIs in conducting labor-
                                        market-driven autonomous programs.

                                        School Sector Development Program (SSDP) also supported several reforms such as expansion of
                                        the National Early Grade Reading Program, teacher time spent teaching, teacher redeployment,
                                        and implementation of revised national curriculum framework to improve the quality of
                                        education.

                                        Education Management Information System (EMIS) data aggregated at the Bachelor and Master-
                                        levels for FY 2021/22 (2022/23 data expected to be published in October/ November 2024).


CPF Objective 3.2: Improved access to services and support for the well-being of the vulnerable groups
Rating: Mostly Achieved


Indicator 3.2.1: Number of households   Mostly Achieved                       Finalizing policy and legislative reforms and implementing   Projects Closed by End of CPF
have access to water and sanitation                                           federalism in the WASH sector is critical to attract         • Integrated Platform for Gender
services in targeted districts/state    Actual (Jun. 2024): 1,140,770         investments to close service gaps. Efforts should be made

                                                                                                                                                                       37
         Objectives/Indicator                   Status at CLR Review              Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                     WBG Instruments

                                          individuals (approx. 252,942        to implement sectoral reforms and to build a sector               Based Violence Prevention and
Baseline: 518,258 individuals (2018)      households)                         investment program.                                               Response in Nepal (P155096,
(approx. 114,913 households)                                                                                                                    US$1.59 million)
                                          (Approximately 49% of the total     During implementation of RWSSIP, the government                 • NP Rural Water Supply and
Target: 1,182,000 individuals (of which   beneficiaries reached were          implemented a new program that sought to provide                  Sanitation Improvement
female 49%) (2024) (approx. 262,084       women)                              households with access to yard connections rather than            Project (P143036, IDA 54400 &
households)                                                                   communal taps. This increased the cost of services under          H9450, US$66.3 million)
                                          Source: Under the Rural Water       the Project.
Status at PLR: 875,208 individuals        Supply and Sanitation                                                                               Projects Active at End of CPF
(49% female) (approx. 194,059             Improvement Project (RWSSIP),       The Nepal Water Sector Governance and Infrastructure            • Strengthening Systems for
households)                               1,140,770 individuals.              Support Project aims to build WSS capacity at the local           Social Protection and Civil
                                                                              level, but disbursement has been slow as foundational             Registration (P154548, IDA
Note: Average rural household size        This figure accounts for both new   implementation arrangements needed to be built.                   59120, US$115 million)
(4.51) from 2021 Census used for          schemes built under the project                                                                     • Food and Nutrition Security
calculations                              and schemes rehabilitated as part   Suggestions: Projects should be designed realistically to         Enhancement (P164319,
                                          of the post-earthquake recovery –   account for the need to build capacities at the local and         TF0A8013, US$22.7 million)
                                          community tap and yard              provincial level.                                               • Nepal Water Governance and
                                          connections to 794,994 people                                                                         Infrastructure Project
                                          and rehabilitation of schemes to    Future projects should include sufficient time and                (P176589, US$80 million)
                                          354,776 people in earthquake        resources for building foundational implementation
                                          affected districts.                 arrangements – before results in reducing service gaps can      ASA Closed by End of CPF
                                                                              be seen.                                                        • Health Financing Strategy
                                                                              New programming should build on an updated sector                 Support (P166804)
                                                                              development plan, with realistic costs and funding              • Adaptive Social Protection TA
                                                                              availability.                                                     (P163514)
                                                                                                                                              • Advancing Social Protection II
Indicator 3.2.2: Children aged 6-23       Achieved                            Suggestions: Organizing women of reproductive age in              (P164003)
months, in targeted districts, with                                           meaningful collectives and supporting them with low-cost        • Water Platform and Strategy
minimum acceptable diet (Percentage)      Actual (Jun. 2024): 29%             inputs, practicable knowledge, and life skills is critical to     Development (P168191)
(Revised)                                                                     their empowerment, enhanced decision-making for child           • Water Platform 2.0 (P171575)
                                          Source: From FANSEP I (DIME         and self-health and nutrition.                                  • Early Childhood Education
Baseline: 18% (2018)                      Endline Survey – report to be                                                                         Diagnostic (P169661)
                                          published)                          Financial and technical support for healthy and diverse
                                                                                                                                              • National workshop of
Target: 8% over baseline (2024)                                               diets must be complemented with social and behavior

                                                                                                                                                                           38
         Objectives/Indicator                   Status at CLR Review                  Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                     WBG Instruments

                                         Midline: 27% (August 2022)               change communication to influence maternal, infant, and           Indigenous peoples (Ips)/civil
Status at PLR: Assessment under          DIME year 5 survey: 22% (June            young child nutrition at the household level.                     society organizations (CSOs) in
progress                                 2023)                                                                                                      Nepal (P171713)
                                                                                  Community-based platforms are productive mechanisms             • Human Development Public
                                                                                  for delivery of services in the realm of agriculture, health,     Expenditure Review (P169010)
                                                                                  and nutrition in Nepal.                                         • SPF: Maximizing the
                                                                                                                                                    Development Impact of the
                                                                                  Nutrition is critical to human capital accumulation must be       IDA18 FCV Risk Mitigation
                                                                                  integrated in ‘nutrition sensitive’ operations to influence       Regime in Nepal (P171624)
                                                                                  outcomes.
                                                                                                                                                  ASA Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                                  • GRID PASA (P176456)
Indicator 3.2.3: Number of Gender        Mostly Achieved                          Suggestion: The results framework needs to have a clear
Based Violence (GBV) survivors have                                               definition for and the calculation formulae for indicators
access to justice and support            Actual (2022/2023): 7,383                tracked
                                         beneficiaries
Baseline: 300 GBV survivor/year
(2018)                                   Source: Nepal Women’s
                                         Commission data
Target: 11,000 survivor/year (2024)
                                         Note: Survivors are defined as the
Status at PLR: 17,821 (support), 4,620   cumulative count of individuals
(legal counseling) and 929 (court        receiving (i) direct services and
representation)                          follow-ups, (ii) linked referrals, and
                                         (iii) information resources.

Indicator 3.2.4: Number of pregnant      Mostly Achieved                          Project target was revised to 21,000 in August 2023 and
and lactating mothers receiving                                                   the CPF target is 30,000.
improved nutrition services and          Actual (Jun. 2024): 20,982
products in targeted areas/state                                                  Suggestion: RF indicators and the ability to achieve them
                                         Source: Food and Nutrition               needs to be more closely assessed at the PLR stage.
Baseline: 0 (2018)                       Security Enhancement Project I

Target: Increase by 30,000 (2024)

                                                                                                                                                                               39
         Objectives/Indicator                     Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                WBG Instruments


Status at PLR: 707


                                            Additional Evidence Objective 3.2: Household Dietary diversity score including nursing mothers
                                            and children under two years has reached 7.40 percent as of September 22, 2023.

                                            Source: Household dietary diversity score (Component C intermediate result indicator) at the
                                            mid-line survey conducted by FANSEP I.


CPF Objective 3.3: Increased resilience to health shocks, natural disasters, and climate change
Rating: Partially Achieved


Indicator 3.3.1: Number of eligible         Achieved                                                                                         Projects Closed by End of CPF
beneficiaries who have access to social                                                                                                      • Earthquake Housing
security allowance program in selected      Actual (Jun. 2024) 3.8 million (of                                                                 Reconstruction Project
districts                                   which 2.2 million female)                                                                          (P155969, IDA 57060 US$ 200
                                                                                                                                               million)
Baseline: 2.3 million (of which 1.5         Source: Strengthening Systems for                                                                • Earthquake Housing
million female) (2018)                      Social Protection and Civil                                                                        Reconstruction Additional
                                            Registration                                                                                       Financing (P163593, IDA 61640,
Target: 2.9 million (of which 1.9 million                                                                                                      US$300 million)
female) (2024)                                                                                                                               • Earthquake Housing
                                                                                                                                               Reconstruction Project
Status at PLR: 2.96 million (of which                                                                                                          Additional Financing 2
1.8 million female)                                                                                                                            (P155969, IDA 65300, US$200
                                                                                                                                               million
                                                                                                                                             • Multi Donor Trust Fund funding
Indicator 3.3.2: Accuracy and               Not Achieved                         Suggestion: Results indicators to be used in the CPF          for EHRP (Safer Reconstruction)
timeliness of weather and flood                                                  Results Framework need to be measurable beyond the            (P162067, TFA4783, US$15
forecasts and early warning                 Actual (Jun. 2024): N/A              project closing date.                                         million)
dissemination (Revised)                                                                                                                      • Nepal Finance for Growth DPC


                                                                                                                                                                         40
         Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                    WBG Instruments

Baseline: 0.49 (24-hour period) (2017)   Source: Building Resilience to                                                                        1 (P173044, IDA-67150,
                                         Climate Hazards                                                                                       US$200 million)
Target: 0.55 (24-hour period) (2024)     Project                                                                                             • Nepal Finance for Growth DPC
                                                                                                                                               2 (P176881, US$150 million)
Status at PLR: 0.45                                                                                                                          • Nepal Finance for Growth DPC
                                                                                                                                               3 (P176881, US$100 million)

Indicator 3.3.3: Adoption of disaster    Not Achieved                         An important lesson from 2015 earthquake relates to the        Projects Active at End of CPF
risk financing and insurance schemes                                          government’s Interest Rate Subsidy Program. The program        • Strengthening Systems for
(Revised)                                Actual (Jun. 2024): 0                to support rebuilding houses did not have uptake because         Social Protection and Civil
                                                                              (i) the interest spread of 2% did not cover the operating        Registration (P154548, IDA
Baseline: 0 (2017)                       Source: Public Data                  cost of the lender and (ii) more importantly, the risk of        5912, US$115 million)
                                                                              default was entirely borne by the lender. Building             • Nepal Development Policy
Target: 1 Increase (2024)                The Finance for Growth (F4G) DPC     awareness among individuals, businesses, and provincial          Financing with CAT DDO
                                         identified the lack of progress in   governments about disaster risks and their responsibilities      (P166788, IDA 65430, US$50
Status at PLR: 0                         adopting disaster risk financing     is critical. Compensation arrangements that encourage            million)
                                         and insurance schemes. The target    public and private participation in risk reduction should be   • Nepal COVID-19 Emergency
                                         in the F4GIII DPC is for the         explored.                                                        Response and Health System
                                         achievement of this.                                                                                  Preparedness Project
                                                                                                                                               (P173760, IDA 66040, US$29
                                                                                                                                               million)
                                                                                                                                             • South Asia: Climate Adaptation
                                                                                                                                               and Resilience for South Asia
                                                                                                                                               (P171054, IDA-D6210/ IDA-
                                                                                                                                               D6220/ TF-B2642 US$39.50
                                                                                                                                               million)

                                                                                                                                             ASAs Closed at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                             • Nepal Advancing Social
                                                                                                                                               Protection II (P164003)
                                                                                                                                             • Adaptive Social Protection TA
                                                                                                                                               (P163514)
                                                                                                                                             • Water Platform and Strategy
                                                                                                                                               Development (P168191)

                                                                                                                                                                         41
         Objectives/Indicator                  Status at CLR Review                Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                  WBG Instruments

                                                                                                                                            • Water Platform 2.0 (P171575)
                                                                                                                                            • Support to Government on
                                                                                                                                              Pandemic/Epidemic
                                                                                                                                              Preparation (P168171)
                                                                                                                                            • Nepal Crisis Preparedness Gap
                                                                                                                                              Analysis (P179173)

                                                                                                                                            ASA Active at End of CPF
                                                                                                                                            • Nepal Climate-Smart
                                                                                                                                              Agriculture Investment Plan
                                                                                                                                              (Deliverable of P176456)
                                                                                                                                            • Nepal Climate Change and
                                                                                                                                              Development Report (CCDR)
                                                                                                                                              (P176737)
                                                                                                                                            • GRID Programmatic ASA
                                                                                                                                              (P176456)


                                         Additional Evidence Objective 3.3: Following the adoption of National Disaster Risk Financing
                                         Strategy, 2020, efforts are underway to develop guidelines for public asset management,
                                         informed by a diagnostic report on Nepal's Contingent Liabilities from Natural Disasters. Health
                                         and Education sector public assets have been identified as a priority for catastrophe risk
                                         coverage to safeguard uninterrupted services.


CPF Objective 3.4: Improved adoption of sustainable natural resource management
Rating: Mostly Achieved


Indicator 3.4.1: Increase in number of   Achieved                              Experience of NLSIP and FANSEP has shown that CSA            Projects Closed by End of CPF
farmers adopting climate smart                                                 practices are adopted when they show clear benefits and      • Building Resilience to Climate
agricultural practices in targeted       Actual (Jun. 2024): Total 84,868      returns. The beneficiaries need to understand the              Related Hazards Project
districts/States                         (54.56% female approx.):              tradeoffs (if any) and the practices must be socially and      (P127058, TF13557, TF13665
                                         72,868 (of which female 56.6%)        economically viable. It is not possible to measure the         US$31 million)
Baseline: 0 (2017)                       (WB) + 12,000 farmers (43%            outcomes of adopting CSA practices in quantitative terms

                                                                                                                                                                         42
         Objectives/Indicator                 Status at CLR Review                 Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                 WBG Instruments

                                        female approx.) (IFC)                  due to the lack of benchmark indicators and user-friendly    • FCPF REDD Readiness grant
Target: Additional 84,300 farmers (of                                          scientific tools. The engagement of private sector in CSA      (AF) (P125198, TFA4169,
which female 45%) (2024)                Source: 25,195 from Food and           practices remains largely untapped.                            US$5.2 million)
                                        Nutrition Security Enhancement                                                                      • Nepal Livestock Sector
Status at PLR: 15,222 farmers (of       Project (71% female) + 47,673          Suggestions: Uniform approaches (CSA practices) across all     Innovation (P156797, IDA
which female 40.1%) +12,000 farmers     (48.3% female) from Nepal              agricultural sectors and projects are required. These          61490, US$80 million)
(of which female 43% approx.) (IFC)     Livestock Sector Innovation            approaches should be guided by the research findings.        • Food and Nutrition Security
                                        Project                                Capacity-building of the technicians for greenhouse gas        Enhancement (P164319,
                                                                               accounting from each practice be provided and monitored.       TF0A8013, US$22.7 million)
                                        IFC intervention: 12,000 farmers
                                        (43% female approx.)                   Team should ensure that data units used in the ISR data      Projects Active at End of CPF
                                                                               sheet are consistent.                                        • NP Modernization of Rani
                                                                                                                                              Jamara Kulariya Irrigation
                                                                                                                                              Phase 2 (P158364, IDA 61940,
Indicator 3.4.2: Net Decrease in        Partially Achieved                                                                                    US$61 million)
greenhouse gas emissions from                                                                                                               • Rural Enterprise and Economic
deforestation and forest degradation    Actual (Jun. 2024): 2.3 million tons                                                                  Development Project P170215,
                                        of CO2                                                                                                US$80 million)
Baseline: 0 (2017)                                                                                                                          • Nepal Grid Solar and Energy
                                        Source: Nepal Emission Reduction                                                                      Efficiency (P146344, IDA 55660,
Target: 9 million tons of CO2           Program for Terai Arc Project’s                                                                       US$130 million)
                                        Measurement, Reporting, and                                                                         • Forests for Prosperity Project
Status at PLR: 0 (First Measurement,    Verification (MRV) Report.                                                                            (P170798, TF0B2796, and
Reporting and Verification [MRV]        (Submitted to the Carbon Fund                                                                         TF0B2488, US$24 million)
reporting period will cover June 22,    and pending verification by the                                                                     • Nepal Emission Reduction
2018-December 31, 2021)                 third-party audit firm)                                                                               Program for Terai Arc
                                                                                                                                              (P165375, up to US$45 million)
                                        The total amount of tons of CO2                                                                     • Dedicated Grant Mechanism
                                        might be lower than anticipated,                                                                      for Indigenous Peoples and
                                        to be verified during the second                                                                      Local Communities (P171720,
                                        submission of the MRV report.                                                                         US$4.5 million)
                                                                                                                                            • Accelerating Transport and
                                                                                                                                              Trade Connectivity in Eastern
Indicator 3.4.3 (New): Number of sub-   Achieved

                                                                                                                                                                        43
         Objectives/Indicator                   Status at CLR Review             Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF                  WBG Instruments

national land use/spatial plans                                                                                                              South Asia (ACCESS) Project
governing sustainable natural             Actual (Jun. 2024): 2 municipal-                                                                   ($27m Green Resilient
resources use                             level land use plans have                                                                          Component 2C)
                                          approved, and 307 forest
Baseline: 0 (2017)                        management plans were renewed.                                                                   ASA Closed by the End of CPF
Target: 2 subnational land use/spatial                                                                                                     • Nepal Forest Note "Forest for
plans (2024)                                                                                                                                 Prosperity" (P166888)
                                          Source: Forests for Prosperity                                                                   • Environmental Sector
Status at PLR: Assessment to be           Project                                                                                            Diagnostics: Priorities for
completed in 2023                                                                                                                            accelerating growth (P164550)
                                                                                                                                           • Nepal Federalism Transition
                                                                                                                                             Support (P165942)
Indicator 3.4.4 (New): Additional ha of   Partially Achieved                 Building on Ministry of Forests and Environment in soil and   • Water Platform and Strategy
degraded forest rehabilitated.                                               water conservation, developing a landscape approach             Development (P168191)
                                          Actual (Jun. 2024): 4,877 ha of    would address various challenges at once.                     • Water Platform 2.0 (P171575)
Baseline: 0 (2018)                        degraded forest                                                                                  • Promoting Climate Resilient
                                                                             Suggestions: The 2022 Forest Regulation sets the stage for      Agriculture, Nepal (PPCR Nepal)
Target: Additional 10,000 ha (2024)       Source: Nepal Emission Reduction   further reforms under the upcoming GRID DPC 2 and 3,            (588487) (IFC)
                                          Program for Terai Arc Project’s    which would strengthen its implementation through             • Valuing Green Infrastructure:
Status at PLR: Assessment to be           Measurement, Reporting, and        further reforms such as (i) Provincial policy actions; (ii)     Case Study of Kali Gandaki
completed in 2023                         Verification (MRV) Report.         Strategic Environment Assessment (SEA) guidelines, which        Watershed in Nepal (P161596)
                                          (Submitted to the Carbon Fund      can help manage tradeoffs among sectors; (iii)
                                          and pending verification by the    Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) guidelines; and (iv)    ASA Active at End of CPF
                                          third-party audit firm)            Protected Areas and Wildlife regulation to allow for          • GRID PASA (P176456)
                                                                             tourism concessions that help protect biodiversity and        • Nepal Climate-Smart
                                                                             raise revenues for protected areas and household                Agriculture Investment Plan
                                                                             livelihoods.                                                    (Deliverable under GRID PASA -
                                                                                                                                             P176456)
                                                                                                                                           • Practitioner Program in
                                                                                                                                             Transboundary Watershed
                                                                                                                                             Management in Mountain
                                                                                                                                             Economies (linked to P170798)
                                                                                                                                           • Development of Forest
                                                                                                                                             Accounts (Deliverable under

                                                                                                                                                                       44
Objectives/Indicator         Status at CLR Review               Lessons Learned and Suggestions for the New CPF          WBG Instruments

                                                                                                                    GRID PASA - P176456)
                                                                                                                  • Plastics materials flows and
                                                                                                                    health care waste and Plastic
                                                                                                                    waste diagnostic survey in
                                                                                                                    waterways (SAWI-funded TA -
                                                                                                                    Deliverable under GRID PASA -
                                                                                                                    P176456
                                                                                                                  • Reducing plastic waste
                                                                                                                    disposed in Nepal’s rivers
                                                                                                                    draining in the Bay of Bengal
                                                                                                                    (PROBLUE-funded TA
                                                                                                                    Deliverable under GRID PASA -
                                                                                                                    P176456)


                       Additional Evidence Objective 3.4: N/A




                                                                                                                                             45
                                                        CLR Annex 3: IDA Lending program FY19-24 Planned vs Actual

                                                   (Note: The original FY19-22 CPF programmed only select operations in FY19 and FY20.
                                             The PLR documented substantial, new scaled-up lending through FY22, and programmed only FY23)


                                                               A. Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
                                                                             July 2018 - June 2024

                                                                           Legend     IFC Project     Regional Project

                                      CPF Plan                                                                  CPF Progress at CLR Evaluation
                                     (July 2018)                                                                         (June 2024)
                                                                                                                                                                IDA/TF31
  Focus Areas30                               Project Name                                                               Status
                                                                                                                                                                 (US$M)
 FY19
        FA2          Business Models for Private Sector -Led Mini Grid Energy       Delivered. Business Models for Private Sector-Led Mini Grid Energy Access     7.61
                     Access                                                         (P149239) (TF>US$5m) 1/30/2019
        FA2          Energy Sector DPC                                              Delivered. Nepal Energy Sector Development Policy Credit (P154693)            200
                                                                                    9/18/2018
        FA2          Fourth Financial Sector Stability DPC                          Delivered. Nepal Fourth Financial Sector Stability Credit DPC4 (P159547)      100
                                                                                    8/7/2018
        FA2          Second Bridges Improvement and Maintenance                     Delivered. Second Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Program                 133
                                                                                    (P161929) 9/26/2018
     FA1/FA3         Second Programmatic Fiscal and PFM DPC                         Delivered. Second Programmatic Fiscal and PFM DPC-II, (P168869)               100
                                                                                    06/13/2019
 FY20
    FA2/FA3          Food and Nutrition Security Enhancement                        Delivered. Food and Nutrition Security Enhancement Project (P164319)          22.7
                                                                                    9/25/2019


30 FA1 – Focus Area 1: Public Institutions

 FA2 – Focus Area 2: Private Sector Led Jobs and Growth
 FA3 – Focus Area 3: Inclusion and Resilience
31 Delivery amounts for IDA and TF>US$5 million.

Notes: Items in italics are actuals (approved by the Board).

                                                                                                                                                                           46
                                    CPF Plan                                                                      CPF Progress at CLR Evaluation
                                   (July 2018)                                                                             (June 2024)
                                                                                                                                                                   IDA/TF31
  Focus Areas30                             Project Name                                                                Status
                                                                                                                                                                    (US$M)
       FA2          Accelerating Inclusive Jobs Growth in Nepal                        Delivered. Youth Employment Transformation Initiative (P160696)                120
                                                                                       9/12/2019
       FA3          CAT DDO                                                            Delivered. Nepal Development Policy Financing with CAT DDO 32 (P166788)       50
                                                                                       3/10/2020
       FA2          Energy Sector DPC                                                  Delivered. Second Energy Sector DPC (P170248) 6/2/2020                        100

       FA2          Not planned                                                        Delivered. Nepal Strategic Road and Trade Improvement Project (P170409)       450
                                                                                       6/10/2020
       FA3          Not planned                                                        Delivered. Second Additional Financing Earthquake Housing Reconstruction      200
                                                                                       Project (P170565) 1/14/2020
       FA1          Not planned                                                        Delivered. Nepal COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System                29
                                                                                       Preparedness Project (P173760) 4/3/2020
       FA3          Not planned                                                        Transferred from SARRE. Plastic Free Rivers and Seas for South Asia           37
                                                                                       (P171269)
       FA3          Not planned                                                        Transferred from SARRE. South Asia: Climate Adaptation and Resilience for     39.5
                                                                                       South Asia (P171054)
    FA2/FA3         Not Planned                                                        Nepal Strategic Road Connectivity and Trade Improvement                       250
 FY21
      FA1           Nepal Local Governance and Integrated Infrastructure               Delivered. Nepal Urban Governance and Infrastructure Project (P163418)        150
                    Support                                                            09/28/2020
       FA3          FCPF Nepal Emission Reduction Program (TF)                         Delivered. Nepal Emission Reduction Program for Terai Arc (P165375)           45
                                                                                       1/21/2021
       FA3          Not planned                                                        Delivered. Rural Enterprise and Economic Development Project (P170215)        80
                                                                                       10/28/2020
       FA3          Forests for Prosperity Project (with Forest Investment             Delivered. Forests for Prosperity Project (P170798) 7/8/2020                  24
                    Program and IDA-18 resources) (TF)




32 US$25 million from IDA (concessional) financing IDA 18, US$25 million from other IDA source




                                                                                                                                                                              47
                               CPF Plan                                                          CPF Progress at CLR Evaluation
                              (July 2018)                                                                 (June 2024)
                                                                                                                                                 IDA/TF31
Focus Areas30                        Project Name                                                      Status
                                                                                                                                                  (US$M)
       FA3      Nurturing Excellence in Higher Education               Delivered. Nurturing Excellence in Higher Education Project (P171516)        60
                                                                       7/11/2021
  FA2/FA3       Not planned                                            Delivered. Nepal Finance for Growth DPC-1 (P173044) 9/17/2020               200
  FA1/FA2       Not planned                                            Delivered. Nepal Programmatic Fiscal Policy for Growth, Recovery and        150
                                                                       Resilience DPC (P173982) 6/16/2021
  FA1/FA3       Not planned                                            Delivered. COVID-19 School Sector Program (GPE) (P174209) 9/21/20           10.8
    FA3                                                                Delivered. Additional Financing for Nepal: Power Sector Reform and           1
                                                                       Sustainable Hydropower Development (PSRSHD) Project
       FA1      Not planned                                            Delivered. Additional Financing: Nepal COVID-19 Emergency Response and      75
                                                                       Health Systems Preparedness Project (P175848) 3/18/2021
       FA2      Nepal Sustainable Tourism Value Creation               Dropped. Sustainable Tourism Enhancement of Nepal’s Protected Areas
                                                                       (P165130) scheduled for delivery in FY21 was dropped. Tourism related
                                                                       indicator dropped due to the impact COVID-19 and other reasons
FY22
   FA2/FA3      Not planned                                            Delivered. Digital Nepal Acceleration (DNA) Project (P176543) 6/16/22       140
   FA1/FA3      Not planned                                            Delivered. Water Sector Governance and Infrastructure Support Project        80
                                                                       (P176589) 6/2/22
  FA1/FA3       Not planned                                            Delivered. Additional Financing to SSDP (P176616) 8/8/21                    50
    FA1         Not planned                                            Delivered. Additional Financing for Nepal Health Sector Management          50
                                                                       Reform Program for Results (P176694) 8/8/21
  FA2/FA3       Not planned                                            Delivered. Nepal Second Finance for Growth Development Policy Financing     150
                                                                       (P176881) 3/24/22
  FA1/FA3       Not planned                                            Delivered. Second Additional Financing to Nepal COVID-19 Emergency          18
                                                                       Response and Health Systems Preparedness Project (P178205) 1/12/22
       FA2      Transport PPP (Airport)                                Investment in Transport PPP postponed. TA with Policy dialogue ongoing

       FA3      Forest Investment Program- Dedicated Grant Mechanism   Delivered. Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Indigenous Peoples and Local       4.5
                for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities           Communities (P171720) 10/27/2022
  FA2/FA3       Not Planned                                            Accelerating Transport and Trade Connectivity in Eastern South Asia –       108
                                                                       Nepal Phase 1 Project
FY23


                                                                                                                                                            48
                               CPF Plan                                                             CPF Progress at CLR Evaluation
                              (July 2018)                                                                    (June 2024)
                                                                                                                                                 IDA/TF31
Focus Areas30                        Project Name                                                        Status
                                                                                                                                                  (US$M)
  FA1/FA3       Not planned                                           Nepal Quality Health Systems Program-for-Results                              100
  FA1/FA3       Not planned                                           School Sector Transformation Program Operation                                120
    FA3         Not planned                                           First Nepal Green, Resilient and Inclusive Programmatic DPC                   100
    FA2         Upper Trishuli-1 Hydropower (with IFC, MIGA)          Committed in FY2020. Upper Trishuli-1 (35701)
    FA2         IFC investments/PPP in hydropower                     Projects did not materialize
    FA2         Banking for Women (IFC)                               Project did not materialize
    FA2         Investments for Digital Finance (IFC)                 Project did not materialize
    FA2         Global Trade Finance Program (GTPF) to support SMEs   Committed in FY2022. GTFP Global IME (37956)
                (IFC)
       FA2      Healthcare, agri-business, and manufacturing (IFC)    Business development efforts ongoing
       FA2      IFC Investment in Agribusiness and tourism            Projects did not materialize in tourism due to COVID-19

       FA3      IFC Investment in Health Services                     Project did not materialize                                                  N/A

FY24
       FA2      Not planned                                           Delivered. Provincial and Local Roads Improvement Program Phase 1            100
                                                                      (P171836) 02/29/2024
       FA3      Not planned                                           Delivered. Food and Nutrition Security Enhancement Project II. (P181087)     20
                                                                      09/18/2023
       FA1      Not planned                                           Delivered. Second Fiscal Policy for Growth, Recovery, and Resilience         100
                                                                      Development Policy Credit. (P176498) 02/19/2024
       FA2      No planned                                            Delivered. Nepal Finance for Growth DPC (3 of 3). (P178531) 05/06/2024       80




                                                                                                                                                            49
Planned Versus Actual ASA (on June 30, 2024)
                                                                     (Bold=Completed)
                                   ASA Program                                                              Status
                                                               ASA Planned in Original CPF
                                                                        Delivered in FY19 as Nepal Fiscal Policy Analysis and Management Program
       Nepal Fiscal Federalism/ Fiscal Policy Analysis
                                                                        (P157724) 6/28/2019, and
       and Management
                                                                        Support for Fiscal Management (P160712) 6/26/2019
       Nepal Federalism Transition Support/Fiscal                       Delivered in FY19 as Nepal Fiscal Federalism (Transition) (P165688) 4/3/2019
       Federalism Transition                                            and Nepal Federalism Transition Support (P165942) 6/20/2019
       Cost of Federalism and Capacity Gap                              Delivered in FY20 as Federalism Capacity Needs Assessment (P168504)
       Survey/Capacity Needs Assessment for                             11/21/2019; and as Programmatic Federalism Support Platform (P168170)
       federalism.                                                      6/20/2019
       Urban Governance and Federalism                                  Delivered in FY19 as Urban Governance and Federalism (P165231) 5/15/2019
        Human Development Public Expenditure Review                     Delivered in FY21 (P131564)
       Health Financing Strategy Support                                Delivered in FY21 as Health Financing Strategy Support (P166804) 7/7/2020
       InfraSAP                                                         Nepal - Infrastructure Sector Assessment (P165688) delivered 2/27/2019
       Regional Energy Sector Dialogue                                  ASA delivered
       Developing Improved Solutions for Cooking                        Developing Improved Solutions for Cooking (P149764) delivered 6/5/2019
       Renewable Energy Resource Mapping and                            Renewable Energy Resource Mapping and Geospatial Planning delivered in FY21
       Geospatial Planning                                              (P150328) delivered 8/21/20
       Cross-cutting advisory to bankability of
                                                                        Completed. Nepal Hydro Sector Development Program (599991)
       hydropower (IFC)
       Environment & social advisory to improve standards in
                                                                        Completed. Nepal E&S Hydro (601760)
       hydropower (IFC)
       Bridges Impact Evaluation                                        Ongoing, activity being conducted under BIMP II (PforR) (P161929)
       Policy Note on Agriculture Finance Strategy                      Policy Note on Agriculture Finance Strategy (P165645) delivered 6/28/2019
       Finance and Competitiveness Dialogue                             Delivered in FY19 as Nepal FCI Policy Engagement (P168914) 6/28/2019
        Insolvency Reform (TA)                                          Ongoing activity being conducted under Post Covid Pvt sector recovery Program
                                                                        (P174486)

                                                                                                                                                        50
Digital Financial Service (IFC)                               Ongoing. Nepal Digital Financial Services (607196)
FinInfra Nepal (IFC)                                          Ongoing. Nepal Financial Infrastructure Strengthening (604073
Access to Finance (IFC)                                       Ongoing. Access to Financial Services Nepal (602783)
South Asia Regional Trade Facilitation Program
                                                              Completed. South Asia Regional Trade and Investments (597407)
(SARTI) (IFC)
Investment Climate Reforms Industry (IFC)                     Completed. Nepal Investment Climate for Industry (593787)
Competition in transport sector Nepal (TA) PPP
                                                              Project did not materialize
in SEZs and Industrial Park (TA)
Nepal Market Creation for Tourism (IFC)                       Dropped. Nepal Creating Markets for Tourism (602476)
Support to Developing an Inclusive Jobs                       Delivered in FY20 Support to developing an inclusive jobs strategy for Nepal
Strategy for Nepal/Nepal Jobs Platform                        (P163141) 6/19/2020
IFC advisory Services in Agribusiness and
                                                              Ongoing. Nepal Sustainable Agribusiness Supply Chains (605701)
tourism
Early Childhood Development                                   Delivered in FY20 as Early Childhood Education Diagnostic (P169661) 2/5/2020
Integrated Platform for Gender Based Violence                 Delivered under Integrated Platform for Gender Based Violence Prevention and
Prevention and Response in Nepal (TA) TF)                     Response in Nepal (TF financed project) (P155096)
Adaptive Social Protection TA                                 Delivered in FY19 TA for adaptive Social Protection in Nepal (P163514)
Water Sector Strategic Platform                               Delivered as Water Platform and Strategy Development (P168191) 3/28/2019
Nepal Climate Change                                          Delivered in FY23 Nepal Climate Change and Development Report (P176737)
Nepal Advancing Social Protection II                          Delivered in FY20 as Advancing Social Protection II (P163514) 12/9/2019
Adaptive Social Protection TA                                 Delivered in FY19 TA for adaptive Social Protection in Nepal (P163514)
                                                              3/28/2019
Environmental Sector Diagnostics: Priorities for              Delivered in FY19 as Nepal Environment Sector Diagnostics: Priorities for
accelerating growth                                           accelerating sustainable growth (P164550) 6/28/2019
Catchment and hydropower ASA                                  ASA delivered
                                                   ASA not planned in Original CPF
Macro Monitoring and Analysis FY19                            Delivered (P152522) 6/17/2019
FY2018 Nepal Development Updates                              Delivered (P165663) 8/20/2018


                                                                                                                                             51
Policy Notes for the new Government                               Delivered (P166154) 2/1/2019
Debt Reform Plan Nepal                                            Delivered (P170679) 6/27/2019
Macro Monitoring and Analysis FY20                                Delivered (P172106) 6/18/2020
Macro Monitoring and Analysis FY21                                Delivered (P174718) 6/25/2021
Nepal Macro Monitoring and Analysis FY2022
                                                                  Delivered (P177436) 6/20/2022

Nepal Macro Monitoring and Analysis FY2023
                                                                  Delivered (P179714) 6/20/2023

Nepal Macro Monitoring and Analysis FY2024                        Delivered (P500910) 6/7/2024
Nepal FCI Policy Engagement                                       Delivered (P168914) 6/26/2020
Nepal Public Expenditure Review                                   Delivered (P172086) 6/22/2021
Technical Assistance for Improving Municipal Solid Waste
                                                         Delivered (P169652) 6/16/2020
Management Services for Urban Local Governments in Nepal
Partnership for Knowledge Based Poverty Reduction and Shared
                                                             Delivered (P163078) 6/28/2020
Prosperity in Nepal
PER for Nutrition in Nepal                                        Delivered (P168568) 11/1/2019
Addressing Malnutrition and Investing in Early Years in Nepal in a
                                                                   Delivered (P168830) 6/28/2020
federalized context
Promoting Inclusive Citizen Participation in Performance Audits in
                                                                   Delivered (P169375) 6/28/2020
Nepal
Nepal Light Poverty Assessment 2021                               Delivered (P175443) 6/18/2021

Sustainable Tourism Development and Value Creation in Nepal       Delivered (P167250) 6/28/2019

Capacity building and implementation support for the National
                                                              Delivered (P169402) 12/18/2020
Road Safety Council

Support to developing an inclusive jobs strategy for Nepal        Delivered (P163141) 6/19/2020

Digital Nepal                                                     Delivered (P171113) 9/30/2020



                                                                                                   52
Investing in people to close Human Capital Gap for Higher and
                                                              Delivered (P168816) 6/11/2019
sustainable inclusive growth

Water Platform 2.0                                            Delivered (P171575) 4/11/2019

Nepal Fiscal Federalism Advisory Support Program              Delivered (P175376) 5/31/2024

National workshop of IPs/CSOs in Nepal                        Delivered (P171713) 12/4/2019

Women’s Non-Farm Employment in Nepal (P172067) 6/25/2020      Delivered (P172067) 6/25/2020

SPF: Maximizing the Development Impact of the IDA18 FCV Risk
                                                             Delivered (P171624) 6/30/2021
Mitigation Regime in Nepal
DIME Agriculture and Irrigation in Nepal                      Delivered (P154309) 6/17/2020

Support to government on Pandemic Epidemic preparation        Delivered (P168171) 3/27/2020

Nepal Debt Management Performance Assessment                  Delivered (P180525) 9/13/2023

Nepal Crisis Preparedness Gap Analysis                        Delivered (P179173) 12/22/2023

Nepal Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
                                                             Delivered (P175522) 12/31/2023
Assessment 2022




                                                                                               53
                                                 CLR Annex 4: World Bank Nepal Portfolio FY19-24

Project ID         Project Name                                                   Lending   Approval   Bank Approval Date   Closing Date   Total
                                                                                  Inst.     FY                                             Commitment
                                                                                  Type
Ongoing Projects
DPF/DPCs (3)
P166788            Nepal Development Policy Financing with CAT DDO                DPF       2020       10-Mar-2020          30-Nov-2024    50.00

P176498            Second Fiscal Policy for Growth, Recovery and Resilience       DPF       2024       29-Feb-2024          28-Feb-2025    100.0
                   Development Policy Credit
P178531            Third Nepal Finance for Growth DPC                             DPF       2024       6-May-2024           25-Apr-2025    80.0

IPF (16)
P154548            Strengthening Systems for Social Protection and Civil          IPF       2017       02-Dec-2016          30-Jun-2024    109.36
                   Registration Project
P156797            Nepal Livestock Sector Innovation Project                      IPF       2018       07-Dec-2017          30-Jun-2024    46.26
P164319            Food and Nutrition Security Enhancement Project                IPF       2019       25-Sep-2018          30-Jun-2024    22.70

P160696            Youth Employment Transformation Initiative Project             IPF       2020       12-Sep-2019          15-Jul-2025    120.00

P173760            Nepal: COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems          IPF       2020       03-Apr-2020          15-Jul-2024    87.6
                   Preparedness Project
P149239            Nepal: Private Sector-Led Mini-Grid Energy Access Project      IPF       2019       30-Jan-2019          31-Mar-2025    7.61

P158364            NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme -   IPF       2018       20-Mar-2018          15-Jul-2025    61.00
                   Phase 2
P163418            Nepal Urban Governance and Infrastructure Project              IPF       2021       28-Sep-2020          15-Jul-2025    150.00

P170215            Rural Enterprise and Economic Development Project              IPF       2021       28-Oct-2020          15-Jul-2025    37.31



                                                                                                                                                    54
Project ID                Project Name                                                     Lending   Approval   Bank Approval Date   Closing Date   Total
                                                                                           Inst.     FY                                             Commitment
                                                                                           Type
P170798                   Forests for Prosperity Project                                   IPF       2021       08-Jul-2020          30-Sep-2025    24.00

P165375                   Nepal Emission Reductions Program in the Terai Arc Landscape     IPF       2021       21-Jan-2021          31-Dec-2025    45.00

P170409                   Nepal Strategic Road Connectivity and Trade Improvement          IPF       2020       10-Jun-2020          15-Jul-2027    301.64
                          Project
P176589                   Water Sector Governance and Infrastructure Support Project       IPF       2022       02-Jun-2022          15-Jul-2028    80.00


P177902                   Accelerating Transport and Trade Connectivity in Eastern South   IPF       2022       28-Jun-2022          15-Jul-2028    275.00
                          Asia – Nepal Phase 1 Project

P181087                   Food And Nutrition Security Enhancement Project II               IPF       2024       18-Sep-2023          30-Jun-2027    20.00

P171836                   Provincial and Local Roads Improvement Program - Phase 1         IPF       2024       29-Feb-2024          15-Jul-2029    100.00

Program for Results (4)
P161929                   Second Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Program               PforR     2019       26-Sep-2018          15-Jul-2024    118.21

P171516                   Nurturing Excellence in Higher Education Program for Results     PforR     2021       11-Jun-2021          15-Jul-2026    60.00

P177647                   School Sector Transformation Program Operation                   PforR     2023       24-Mar-2023          16-Jul-2027    120.00


P177389                   Nepal Quality Health Systems Program-for-Results                 PforR     2023       28-Apr-2023          15-Jul-2028    100.00


                          NEPAL Total Ongoing Projects                                                                                              2115.68




                                                                                                                                                              55
Closed Projects

       Project ID            Project Name              Lending Inst.   Closing FY     Net Comm.     Project Closing   Project Closing Date
                                                       Type                           Amt Total          Date

2019

P159547             Nepal Fourth Financial Sector      DPF             2019         100.00        30-Jun-2019         30-Jun-2019
                    Stability Credit DPC4
P160792             Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC           DPF             2019         200.00        28-Feb-2019         28-Feb-2019
P154693             Nepal Energy Sector                DPF             2019         100.00        31-Mar-2019         31-Mar-2019
                    Development Policy Credit
P105860             Poverty Alleviation Fund II        IPF             2019         242.07        31-Dec-2018         31-Dec-2018
2020
P113441             Nepal: School Sector Reform        IPF             2020         220.81        15-Jul-2019         15-Jul-2019
                    Program
P122406             Kabeli-A Hydro Electric Project    IPF             2020         17.24         30-Dec-2019         30-Dec-2019
P095977             Road Sector Development Project    IPF             2020         128.52        15-Jan-2020         15-Jan-2020
P132750             Project for Strengthening the      IPF             2020         91.50         15-Jan-2020         15-Jan-2020
                    National Rural Transport Program
2021
P173044             Finance for Growth Development     DPF             2021         200.00        30-Jun-2021         30-Jun-2021
                    Policy Financing
P147010             Higher Education Reforms Project   IPF             2021         62.66         31-Dec-2020         31-Dec-2020
P170248             Second Programmatic Energy         DPF             2021         100.00        30-Jun-2021         30-Jun-2021
                    Sector Development Policy Credit
P127508             Building Resilience to Climate     IPF             2021         24.92         15-Nov-2020         15-Nov-2020
                    Related Hazards
2022
P173982             Nepal Programmatic Fiscal Policy   DPF             2022         150.00        31-May-2022         31-May-2022
                    for Growth, Recovery and
                    Resilience DPC
P115767             Nepal-India Electricity            IPF             2022         115.32        31-Oct-2021         31-Oct-2021
                    Transmission and Trade Project


                                                                                                                                         56
P131592   SREP-Supported Extended Biogas     IPF     2022   4.18     31-Aug-2021   31-Aug-2021
          Project
P144335   Nepal-India Regional Trade and     IPF     2022   76.71    30-Nov-2021   30-Nov-2021
          Transport Project
P143036   NP Rural Water Supply and          IPF     2022   62.60    15-Jul-2021   15-Jul-2021
          Sanitation Improvement Project
2023
P176881   Nepal Second Finance for Growth    DPF     2023   150.00   30-Jun-2023   30-Jun-2023
          Development Policy Financing
P160748   Nepal School Sector Development    PforR   2023   235.00   16-Jul-2022   16-Jul-2022
          Program
P160207   Nepal Health Sector Management     PforR   2023   200.00   16-Jul-2022   16-Jul-2022
          Reform Program
P146344   Nepal: Grid Solar and Energy       IPF     2023   107.39   15-Dec-2022   15-Dec-2022
          Efficiency
P150066   Nepal: Power Sector Reform and     IPF     2023   12.01    30-Dec-2022   30-Dec-2022
          Sustainable Hydropower
          Development (PSRSHD)
P177776   First Nepal Green, Resilient and   DPF     2023   100.00   30-Jun-2023   30-Jun-2023
          Inclusive Programmatic DPC
P155969   Earthquake Housing                 IPF     2023   700.00   30-Jun-2023   30-Jun-2023
          Reconstruction Project
P162067   Multi Donor Trust Fund Funding     IPF     2023   14.11    30-Jul-2022   30-Jul-2022
          for Earthquake Housing
          Reconstruction Project
2024
P164783   Integrated Public Financial        IPF     2024   9.00     16-Jul-2023   16-Jul-2023
          Management Reform Project
P163018   Enhanced Vocational Education      IPF     2024   56.50    16-Jul-2023   16-Jul-2023
          and Training Project II




                                                                                                 57
                       CLR Annex 5: IFC Committed and Outstanding Portfolio FY19-24

IFC Program Evolution
                                                        Annual Program (US$ millions)
                                          FY19         FY20           FY21     FY22     FY23        FY24          FY19-FY24
     Total LTF Commitments                35.0         397.5          19.6     45.0     62.3        72.0            631.4
 Of which: Own Account                    35.0         105.7          19.6     45.0     38.5        47.5            291.3
 Of which: Mobilization                     -          291.8          0.0       0.0     23.8        24.5            340.1
     Total STF                            4.4           7.1           10.3      5.4      0.5        0.9             28.6

Own Account Portfolio

                                Own Account Committed Exposure (US$ millions, as of June 30, 2024)
                                                              MAS33          INR34       FIG35            CDF36       Total

     Committed Exposure                                        8.9           116.6       82.6              17.7       225.8
     Top 3 exposures (project names and                 UT-1 (US$106.1M), Global IME Bank (US$30M) Siddhartha Bank
     outstanding amounts)                               (US$24M)




33
     Manufacturing, Agribusiness, and Services (MAS)

34
     Infrastructure and Natural Resources (INR)

35
     Financial Institutions Group (FIG)

36
     IFC Disruptive Technologies, Venture Capital, and Funds (CDF)



                                                                                                                    58
        CLR Annex 6: IFC Approved or Active Advisory Services in CPF Period FY19-24

Over the CPF period a total of 8 AS projects were completed, of which seven had positive DE
rating. Of these, 4 were validated by IEG; all the ratings are shown below.

 Evaluation    Project                               Primary Business
                           Project Name                                  DE rating
 Year          ID                                    Area
                           Nepal Investment                              Mostly Unsuccessful
 2018          593787                                EFI
                           Climate for Industry                          (IEG validated)
                                                                         Mostly Successful
 2019          580627      AS Nirdhan Bank           FIG
                                                                         (IEG validated)
                           PPCR- Promoting
                                                                         Mostly Successful
 2019          588487      Climate Resilient         MAS
                                                                         (Self-Rated)
                           Agriculture, Nepal
                                                                         Successful
 2019          601861      Nepal Local Shares        ESG
                                                                         (Self-Rated)
                           ESRM for the financial                        Mostly Successful
 2020          600378                                ESG
                           sector in Nepal                               (IEG validated)
                           Nepal Hydro Sector                            Mostly Successful
 2022          599991                                INR
                           Development                                   (IEG validated)
                           RMDC-Business Model,
                                                                         Successful
 2022          604128      Credit Risk Management    FIG
                                                                         (Self-Rated)
                           & Partner Trainings
                           Corporate Governance                          Successful
 2023          604269                                MAS
                           for Yeti Nepal                                (Self-Rated)
                                                                         Highly Successful
 2024          601760      Nepal E&S Hydro           ESG
                                                                         (Self-Rated)
                                                                         Mostly Successful
 2024          607527      Sanima Bank RM            FIG
                                                                         (Self-Rated)

List of all IFC Advisory Services with Concept Note approved or active during the CPF period.

                                                                          Primary Business Line
 Project ID               Project Name                 Project Stage
                                                                                   Name
                                                        DROPPED/        Financial Institutions
  600409      SA Umbrella SME-Risk Banking
                                                       TERMINATED       Group
                                                        DROPPED/
  602476      Nepal Creating Markets for Tourism                        Country Advisory
                                                       TERMINATED
                                                                        Manufacturing,
  602669      Nepal Tourism                                COMPLETED
                                                                        Agribusiness & Services
                                                                        Manufacturing,
  602670      Nepal Health                                 COMPLETED
                                                                        Agribusiness & Services
                                                                        Manufacturing,
  602671      Nepal Agri study                             COMPLETED
                                                                        Agribusiness & Services
                                                                        Economics & Private
  602672      Nepal PSD                                    COMPLETED
                                                                        Sector Development
  602783      Access to Financial Services (Nepal)         PORTFOLIO    Country Advisory
                                                                        Treasury Advisory
  602810      Nepal LCF                                    COMPLETED
                                                                        Services


                                                                                             59
                                                             ES&G Sustainability
602811   E&S Risk Diagnostics                   COMPLETED
                                                             Advice & Solutions
         Nepal Airport project- Capacity         DROPPED/
602812                                                       Transaction Advisory
         Building                               TERMINATED
         Trishuli CIA and Stakeholder                        ES&G Sustainability
603075                                          COMPLETED
         Engagement                                          Advice & Solutions
         Nepal Financial Infrastructure                      Financial Institutions
604073                                          PORTFOLIO
         Strengthening                                       Group
         RMDC-Business Model, Credi Risk                     Financial Institutions
604128                                          COMPLETED
         Management & Partner Trainings                      Group
                                                             Manufacturing,
604136   Nepal Housing Market Study             COMPLETED
                                                             Agribusiness & Services
604229   PMS: CSA Nepal                          PMS, GA     IFC
         Corporate Governance for Yeti                       ES&G Sustainability
604269                                          COMPLETED
         Nepal                                               Advice & Solutions
604279   UT-1 Local Shares                      COMPLETED    Infrastructure
                                                             Economics & Private
605008   Civil Society Engagement               COMPLETED
                                                             Sector Development
         Assessing viability of investment in                Manufacturing,
605200                                          COMPLETED
         coffee in Nepal                                     Agribusiness & Services
605477   SA Power Pool Upstream Seed            PORTFOLIO    Infrastructure
                                                             ES&G Sustainability
605697   ESG Project for Nepal                  UMBRELLAS
                                                             Advice & Solutions
         Nepal Sustainable Agribusiness                      Manufacturing,
605701                                          PORTFOLIO
         Supply Chains                                       Agribusiness & Services
                                                             ES&G Sustainability
605817   ESG Urja Developers Nepal              COMPLETED
                                                             Advice & Solutions
606136   Nepal Infrastructure PPP                PIPELINE    Transaction Advisory
                                                             Financial Institutions
606422   Sana Kisan Advisory                    PORTFOLIO
                                                             Group
606793   Nepal Tourism Green Recovery A2F       COMPLETED    Country Advisory
         Nepal Digital Infrastructure
606900                                          PORTFOLIO    Infrastructure
         Regulations
                                                             Financial Institutions
606920   Nepal Leasing                          COMPLETED
                                                             Group
                                                             ES&G Sustainability
607180   Integrated ESG Project for Nepal       PORTFOLIO
                                                             Advice & Solutions
607196   Nepal Digital Financial Services       PORTFOLIO    Country Advisory
         Nepal Business Enabling
607203                                           PIPELINE    Country Advisory
         Environment
         Nepal Cancer Hospital and
                                                 DROPPED/    Manufacturing,
607275   Research Center Expansion
                                                TERMINATED   Agribusiness & Services
         Advisory
607310   Nepal Capital Market Development       PORTFOLIO    Country Advisory
607394   Nepal cable car                        PORTFOLIO    Infrastructure
607420   Nepal EV                               PORTFOLIO    Infrastructure
         Laxmi Sunrise Bank Risk                             Financial Institutions
607477                                          PORTFOLIO
         Management                                          Group

                                                                                      60
         Nepal Gender Market Diagnostic               Financial Institutions
607501                                     PIPELINE
         and Scoping                                  Group
                                                      Financial Institutions
607527   Sanima Bank RM                   COMPLETED
                                                      Group
607697   Upaya City Cargo                 PORTFOLIO   Infrastructure
                                                      ES&G Sustainability
608310   NWEDC Nepal                      PORTFOLIO
                                                      Advice & Solutions
                                                      Disruptive Technologies &
608496   SME V Dolma II AS                PORTFOLIO
                                                      Funds
608580   Nepal Cities Advisory             PIPELINE   Country Advisory
608622   Nepal Climate Finance Advisory    PIPELINE   Country Advisory
                                                      Financial Institutions
608668   Siddhartha Bank Advisory         PORTFOLIO
                                                      Group
                                                      Financial Institutions
608675   NMB Bank Advisory                PORTFOLIO
                                                      Group
                                                      Financial Institutions
608686   Global IME Bank Advisory         PORTFOLIO
                                                      Group




                                                                               61
               CLR Annex 7: MIGA’s Guarantee Portfolio as of end-June 2024



Investor           Project            Business         Investor Country   Gross Exposure
Name               Name               Sector                              (US$)
Korea South-East   Upper Trishuli-1   Infrastructure   Korea, Republic    87,403,500
Power Co., Ltd.    Hydropower                          of




                                                                                           62
             Annex 3: Streamlined 2024 Systematic Country Diagnostic for Nepal


The 2018 Systemic Country Diagnostic (SCD) identified six priority areas aimed at boosting growth, reducing
poverty, addressing sources of fragility, and reducing vulnerability: (i) improving public institutions, (ii)
increasing private sector investment for job creation, (iii) acquiring and using human capital, (iv) developing
natural resources, (v) increasing resilience to natural disasters and health shocks, and (vi) getting more from
migration. This 2024 streamlined SCD assesses progress on these priorities and proposes a reprioritization,
focused on areas in which progress has been weak but is urgently needed and areas that are becoming binding
constraints to progress on all other priorities. Reprioritization is also motivated by alignment with the World Bank
Group’s new mission statement, and with Nepal’s upcoming 16th Development Plan.
Recent Developments: Strong Progress on Reducing Poverty and Improving Human Capital, but Insufficient
Growth and Low Productivity

Nepal significantly reduced poverty since 2011, driven in large part by international migration. The poverty
headcount rate (based on the national poverty line) decreased from 25.16 percent in 2011 to 3.57 percent in
2023 (Figure 1), and the Gini index for consumption inequality fell by 1.5 percentage points to 31.3i Per capita
expenditures increased in both urban and rural areas, and the prosperity gap plummeted from 6.70 to 3.98.ii
Higher rates of international migration were the key driver of the strong and equitable improvements in
economic welfare. These large increases in mean per capita expenditures, as measured in the Nepal Living
Standard Surveys, and the 12-year gap since the last survey motivated a revision of the national poverty line to
account for shifting consumption patterns and new, higher norms for living standards. The revised poverty line
increased the real value of the poverty threshold by 70 percent. Using this threshold, the poverty headcount rate
was 20.3 percent in 2023, with substantial variations across Nepal’s seven provinces.

Officially recorded remittances in Nepal remain among the highest in the world (figure 2). In 2022, remittances
accounted for 22.8 percent of GDP, placing Nepal in the world’s top 10 remittance-receiving countries.iii
Migration continued to increase, with the annual outflow (excluding to India) reaching 750,000 people in FY23.
Per capita remittances and the share of households receiving remittances increased, with larger increases at the
lower end of the distribution. Remittances accounted for 32 percent of poverty reduction, second only to rising
domestic wages in the nonagricultural sector, which accounted for 35 percent. As in the past, rising domestic
wages were accompanied by a shift in employment toward nonagricultural jobs and could reflect higher
emigration.iv

Nepal’s economy has grown at a moderate pace since 2010, punctuated by several external shocks. Real GDP
grew at an average annual rate of 4.3 percent between 2010 and 2023, interrupted by the 2015 Gorkha
earthquakes, the 2016 blockade, the 2017 landslide, and the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. On the demand side,
growth was driven by consumption and, to a certain extent, investments, both bolstered by significant remittance
inflows. The production structure of the economy has further shifted from agriculture to services, with services
now contributing over half of GDP. The service sector also accounted for 47 percent of all wage jobs (excluding
subsistence employment in agriculture). Labor force participation outside subsistence agriculture remains low,
particularly for women (30 percent compared with 54 percent for men).v

Nepal’s growth has been inadequate to narrow the income gap with peer countries. Even after attaining lower-
middle-income status in 2019, Nepal’s GDP per capita has fallen behind that of its peers, and the current growth
rate is not sufficient to catch up. Labor productivity trails that of peers, particularly in agriculture and industry.
The gap is narrower in the services sector. The transition to fiscal federalism and external shocks have increased
fiscal deficits. The move from a centralized to a tiered government system, coupled with frequent external
shocks, has increased spending pressures. The average annual fiscal deficit doubled between 2015–19 and 2020–
23, from 2.3 percent of GDP to 4.7 percent of GDP. As a result, public debt increased from around 25 percent of
GDP in 2015 to 43 percent of GDP in 2023.




                                                                                                               1
Figure 1: A decade of sustained poverty reductionError!                                                                Figure 2: Supported but not driven by consumption
Bookmark not defined.                                                                                                  and services-led growth
                                                     Trends in poverty (2010-11 to 2022-23)
                                                                                              2023 National
                                                      79.70                                   Poverty Line

                                                                                              2011 National
                                                                                              Poverty Line
                                                                         47.80

                                                                                              US $2.15 per
                                                     25.16           20.27                    person per day
                                                                                              (2017 PPP)
                                                    8.20                      3.57
                                                                                              US $6.85 per
                                                                               0.91
                                                                                              person per day
                                                 2010-11            2022-23                   (2017 PPP)

Figure 3: Personal remittances continue to account for a large share of GDP and per capita receipts have increased
across the distribution.
                                            30




   Personal remittances as percent of GDP
                                                                                                                                       NLSS 2022/23
                                            25

                                            20

                                            15

                                            10

                                            5



                                                                                                                                       NLSS 2010/11
                                            0



                                                      Nepal                      Sri Lanka                     India
                                                      Bangladesh                 South Asia
                                                                                                                                      Household expenditure percentiles

  Exports are low and inflation high. External competitiveness has deteriorated in recent years, with exports of
  goods and services representing a mere 6.8 percent of GDP in 2022. Distortions from large remittance inflows,
  lack of connective infrastructure, and low tourism receipts were critical factors in the export slump. vi
  Remittances and inflation contributed to the appreciation of the real exchange rate, reducing the
  competitiveness and profitability of the export sector. Limited investment opportunities, because of the nascent
  stage of the private sector, likely resulted in overinvestment in nonproductive assets, particularly real estate.
  The restricted openness of Nepal’s capital account has curbed foreign direct investment (FDI), which stood at
  just 0.4 percent of GDP in 2022, and limited the development of the export sector, job creation, and productivity
  growth.

  Policy measures to mitigate external imbalances and curb inflation inadvertently slowed growth and
  increased the fiscal deficit in FY23. Import restrictions narrowed the external deficit but resulted in a decade-
  high fiscal deficit of 6.1 percent of GDP in FY23, because of Nepal’s reliance on tariffs for revenue. The
  restrictions also led to a major slowdown of growth, to 1.9 percent in FY23, down from 5.6 percent in FY22. The
  decline was driven mainly by a contraction in manufacturing and construction, as well as sluggish wholesale and
  retail trade. Growth is projected to recover to an annual average rate of 5 percent over the medium term,
  slightly above the average of the past 10 years.

  Nepal recorded strong progress on human capital outcomes, but inequality of opportunity persists. Since
  2014, child malnutrition declined, and school attendance and access to health care, including maternal and child
  health; basic sanitation; clean water; and electricity rose.vii Between 2011 and 2023, net school attendance rates
  increased from 78 percent to 96 percent at the primary level and from 30 percent to 48 percent at the secondary
  level.viii Historic patterns of spatial and socioeconomic exclusion continue to limit opportunities of
  disadvantaged groups and places, however: Stunting rates are 1.4 times higher in Karnali, the second-poorest

                                                                                                                                                             2
province, than the national average, and ethnicity accounts for over 60 percent of inequality in malnutrition and
primary school completion outcomes.ix Nepali women also face constraints in their legal rights regarding
property ownership, inheritance, labor protections, and access to finance and markets, as indicated by scores
on the Women, Business, and the Law Index.x

Government spending on health and education, alongside increased private demand, has boosted basic
education and health outcomes.xi However, within the national budget, education funding decreased from 15
percent to 10 percent between 2016 and 2022, while health expenditures increased from 6 percent to 7 percent.
Private spending on health and education rose (Table 1), with a notable shift towards private primary schools
(from 21 percent to 38 percent) and health facilities (from 17 percent to 37 percent) between 2011 and 2023. xii
Despite this, health insurance coverage remains low, at 12 percent for adult women and 13 percent for adult
men.xiii

Progress in growth, poverty reduction, and human capital outcomes occurred despite a weak domestic labor
market, which experienced declining labor force participation and high unemployment, even among the
relatively educated. Over half of employment was in subsistence activities in 2017,xiv but the share of agriculture
in domestic output and employment has been declining, with paid jobs gradually shifting toward services and
manufacturing activities. Nevertheless, around a third of total employment was in self-employment or unpaid
work in 2023. The population out of the labor force remains high, including among people with secondary
education (52 percent) and tertiary education (28 percent), and unemployment rates are high across the
education distribution, except among the small population of workers with tertiary education.xv Nepal’s labor
market also exhibits vulnerability and sluggish recovery from shocks. COVID-19 triggered the largest job losses
in the South Asia Region, affecting two out of five Nepali workers. Eighteen months into the crisis, 22 percent
of lost jobs remained unrecovered, and 23 percent of workers had transitioned to lower-quality employment.xvi

The migration of predominantly male Nepali workers has helped strengthen resilience and reduced poverty,
through strong remittance inflows. Migrant workers earn three times more than domestic workers on
average,xvii with the average migrant worker with nine years of education earning the same as worker in Nepal
with tertiary education.xviii During COVID-19, the correlation between the labor income shock and economic
distress was small or close to zero for migrant households.xix The impacts of out-migration on the country of
origin depend on its net benefits. Benefits include remittances, human capital accumulation, skills and
knowledge flows, and labor allocation efficiency; large-scale migration can also impose economic, societal, and
human costs, however.xx

The transition to federalism has been accompanied by progress in access to the first mile of connective
infrastructure, basic infrastructure services, and the emergence of new economic centers; last-mile challenges
related to equity and the quality of service delivery remain. Over the past decade, basic connectivity increased
dramatically, with the share of the population living within 2 kilometers of any type of paved road rising 39
percent and distances to markets falling in both rural and urban areas. Access to electricity, soared, increasing
76 percent increase in rural areas over this period (Table 1). Spatial heterogeneity in population density and
growth at the subnational level are correlated with proximity to new growth centers, such as provincial capitals,
border crossings, and newly connected towns, and could offer potential for public and private investments in
leveraging agglomeration externalities. At the same time, spatial inequities persist, and challenges related to
quality remain. The distance to a paved road is much longer in the poorest provinces (walking time in
Sudurpaschim is three times the national average), and access to electricity is much lower (close to half the
national average in Karnali).

The lack of targeted policy instruments for the poor leaves Nepal’s progress in poverty reduction vulnerable
to economic and climate shocks and other uninsured risks. Increasing climate variability is likely to increase
risks to livelihoods, economic growth, and food security by reducing agricultural productivity, damaging
infrastructure, and limiting water availability. Along with other factors, increased flooding and heat stress in the
south and more landslides, water stress, and glacial lake overflow in the north would increase food insecurity
and poverty.xxi Nepal’s fiscal model relies largely on public infrastructure and service delivery for resource
distribution. In 2023, Nepal allocated 1.6 percent of GDP to public spending on social assistance; categorically
targeted programs accounted for almost all these expenditures (1.5 percent of GDP). More than a third (38
percent) of the poorest 20 percent of the population now receives some social assistance, but 85 percent of


                                                                                                              3
these people receive assistance through programs that target seniors, single women, or people with disabilities.
The COVID-19 crisis exposed the challenges of relying solely on categorical systems that have limited scalability
and cannot be flexibly reoriented to meet emerging needs during an emergency. Nepal’s inability to activate a
system of direct transfers in response to the pandemic resulted in a minimal emergency fiscal response, covering
just 2 percent of households, a fraction of the regional average of nearly 20 percent.
Progress on Priorities since the 2018 SCD
Since the 2018 SCD, constitutional mandates have supported improved political representation, but women
and disadvantaged groups continue to be underrepresented. In the 2022 federal parliament, the
representation of women rose marginally, the representation of Dalits declined, and the overrepresentation of
the dominant caste groups increased relative to 2017 (see Table 1).xxii The share of women in higher decision-
making powers at the local level remained below 5 percent. In decision-making positions in the civil service
(chief district and administrative officers), the share of Madheshis, Janajatis, Dalits, and women remained 3–19
percent despite new mandates on hiring.xxiii

Strong provisions on transparency and accountability have been established since 2018, but accountability
remains weak, despite requirements for public disclosures and citizen engagement in budget processes and
monitoring of service delivery at all three levels of government. Oversight mechanisms such as the Provincial
Accounts Committees (PACs) have had limited impact, particularly at the federal and provincial levels, and
oversight at the local level, where PACs are optional, is weak. Measures of budget oversight and transparency
declined since the last SCD, as did key measures of institutional quality (see Table 1). Demand-side accountability
remained weak, with low global rankings on opportunities for public participation and limited effectiveness of
de jure mechanisms.

Progress in creating more and better jobs and increasing productivity was weak, with shifts out of agriculture
and self-employment largely into low-quality jobs. Despite a 14-percentage point shift toward wage jobs
between 2017 and 2023, the quality of employment remained low, with 27 percent of all paid jobs in elementary
occupations in 2023. Women were more likely than men to move into wage jobs (19 percentage points versus
10 between 2017 and 2023), to be occupied in elementary occupations (33 percent versus 24 percent), and to
have higher unemployment rates regardless of their education level in 2023. Exports of goods and services
declined substantially since the beginning of the decade, falling to levels significantly below those of peer
countries.

The private sector is dominated by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and remains
hampered by an inadequate regulatory environment. MSMEs contribute around 22 percent of GDP and
account for over 45 percent of all jobs in Nepal. Most of these enterprises are microenterprises; 4 in 10 are
single-person firms. Half of all businesses, which employ a quarter of the total workforce, are unregistered. xxiv
The top four constraints to doing business that firms reported in 2023 included political instability, tax rates,
customs and trade regulations, and access to finance.xxv The share of firms citing electricity as the main obstacle
to doing business fell by 17 percentage points and the share citing transportation declined by 3 percentage
points.

Limited access to finance continues to constrain private sector growth, despite the expanded reach of formal
financial services. Formal financial services expanded significantly, reaching 90 percent of the population and
87 percent of MSMEs, but access to credit for firms remains constrained. Only 35 percent of all establishments
in the economic census reported receiving credit from banks. Almost two-thirds of micro and small enterprises
lacked access to credit for business operations. In contrast, almost half of medium-sized and large enterprises
reported having access to credit, although access to bank credit was lower across the board.xxvi Although the
banking sector expanded by 496 percent, and domestic credit increased from 51 percent of GDP in 2011 to 97
percent in 2022, the increase was from a low base; progress is insufficient to fuel the growth and job creation
needed to support graduation to upper-middle-income status by 2030. FDI is deterred by complex and
restrictive policies, including a long “negative list” of sectors barred from FDI and restrictions on foreign
exchange transactions.xxvii




                                                                                                             4
Notwithstanding significant improvements in addressing multidimensional poverty and enhancing access to
basic services, challenges persist in the quality and utilization of human capital. Despite a rise in secondary
school enrollment rates, 11.2 percent of students dropped out before completing secondary school in 2022.
Tertiary enrollment remained below 20 percent throughout the past decade.xxviii Measures of quality also remain
of concern. Nepal scores only 50 percent on the Human Capital Index, which measures the potential a Nepali
child born today can expect to attain by age 18 given the country’s risks of poor health and education. Learning-
adjusted years of schooling are just 7.2 years, and Nepal ranks in the bottom quartile on learning effectiveness.
Even with positive returns to tertiary education, human capital remains underutilized. Over one-third of youth
are not in education, employment, or in training (NEET). One in four children remained stunted in 2022, despite
impressive reductions in malnutrition rates.xxix

Challenges implementing federalism limit equitable improvements in human capital outcomes. Revenues are
held by the federal government, but the mandate for service delivery is devolved to the local level. The lack of
effective financing and systems for decentralized delivery and a lack of clarity on functional responsibilities limits
the scope for equitable and accountable service delivery. Within the health sector alone, for example, there are
25 overlapping functions between the federal and provincial governments and 15 functions overlapping across
all three levels of government.

Progress toward creating a robust social protection framework that can improve resilience to shocks has been
limited. Over the past decade, the coverage of social assistance in Nepal increased through (i) a 10-fold increase
in real terms in targeted allowances for seniors and a 6-fold increase in benefits for single women and (ii) cash-
based support (mostly of low-value) through a range of new sectoral programs. These programs helped reduce
poverty by 2 percentage points in 2023 (compared with 0.25 percentage points in 2011). However, more than
half of this impact comes from the allowance for seniors alone, with all new transfer programs taken together
accounting for a mere 0.25 percentage point decline in poverty. This limited progress, and the absence of
targeted direct transfer mechanisms that can both reach the poor and be scaled up in response to shocks, calls
for urgent action, especially given Nepal’s high vulnerability to climate change and weak insurance markets.

Limited progress has been made in improving the productive potential of natural resources. Hydropower
could significantly boost Nepal’s government revenues and export earnings and contribute to domestic and
regional decarbonization. Private investments in hydropower increased by 29 percent. Although it is important
for growth, it has limited direct potential for jobs in Nepal.xxx Its impact on productivity is likely to be indirect,
through improved and cheaper electrification. Recent evidence from a nationwide and large-scale expansion of
micro-hydropower suggests that although it led to an increase in manufacturing establishments and had some
impact on labor market outcomes, the impacts were muted in remote locations. Increasing the productive
potential of hydropower investments will therefore also require investments in agglomeration externalities that
promote urbanization with growthxxxi In agriculture, small improvements in access to irrigation and markets
were accompanied by increased land fragmentation and a decrease in the share of farming households
producing for the market.xxxii Forest cover continued to increase (from 26 percent in 1992 to 45 percent in 2019),
in part thanks to successful community-led model of forest development. New data highlight the need for
evidence-based assessments of economic and biophysical potential that systematically take social,
environmental, and institutional risks, including those related to private sector regulation into account, and the
development of private forests, supported by remittances.xxxiii

Migrant destinations and job types became more diversified. Most migration is still to the Gulf countries and
Malaysia (65 percent) and for low-skill jobs (61 percent), but 14 percent of all work migrants now work in other
destinations, including Australia, Japan, and the Republic of Korea, thanks in part to the expansion in bilateral
labor agreements that aim to manage and regulate emigration. Access to international migration opportunities
has also become less unequal, with workers at the lower end of the consumption distribution increasingly able
to access more lucrative jobs in destinations other than India. On their return, however, migrants face
challenges, with 56 percent out of the labor force or unemployed. Skills acquired abroad are not utilized, with
only 15 percent of return migrants employed in the occupation they worked in abroad. Lack of appropriate
domestic jobs and access to finance hinder returnees’ utilization of skills, highlighting the need for migration
policies that can both better leverage and mitigate the complex effects of emigration. Evidence gaps related to

                                                                                                                5
   this priority that will be analyzed in the Nepal Country Economic Memorandum include remittances and human
   capital investments, local labor market spillovers and the general equilibrium effects of migration, and the
   implications of migration related to gender norms and economic outcomes of left-behind members.

    Table 1: Progress on priority areas and objectives since SCD 2018
Focus Area       Objectives                Changes since 2018 SCD
Improving        Increased                - 0.79 pp female underrepresentation relative to population in federal parliament
public           inclusiveness in the     + 5.8 pp overrepresentation of dominant castes relative to population in federal
institutions     political process        parliament
                                          + 2.8 pp underrepresentation of Dalits relative to population in federal parliament
                                          - 20 pp in deputy mayor positions which have a formal mandate for candidacy
                 Improve                  + 20.6 in the global ranking on political stability
                 accountability and       + 16 in the global ranking on rule of law
                 strengthen the rule      + 11 in the global ranking on control of corruption
                 of law                   - 2 in the global ranking on transparency
                                          - 4 in the global ranking on budget oversight
                                          +2 in the global ranking on public participation (bottom quintile)
                 Support for the          - 10 in ranking on the E-Government Development Index on government
                 federalism transition    modernization
                 & invest in the          - 0.2 in the CPIA Public Sector Management and Institutions cluster from 2017 (2.9)
                 capacity of the          - 3 in the global ranking on government effectiveness, lowest among structural and
                 subnational level        regional peers)
                                          - 5 in Statistical Performance Index (37/100) on data sources including macro,
                                          government finances, and statistical data
                 Encourage                + 38% households within 2 hours of walking distance to a paved road (to 76.1%) *
Increasing       investments in           - 9.3 km in average distance to the closest paved road (to 4.7 km) *
private          infrastructure (roads    + 24% households with access to electricity (to 94%) *
sector           and electricity)         - 17 pp in firms reporting electricity as the key business constraint*
investment                                - 3 pp firms reporting transport as the key business constraint*
to create        Strengthen               - 8 pp firms reporting political instability as the key business constraint*
more and         regulation and           +11 pp firms reporting tax rates as the key business constraint*
better jobs      reduce government        + 7 pp firms reporting customs and trade regulations as the key business constraint*
                 involvement in           + 4 pp firms reporting access to finance as the key business constraint*
                 markets
                 Increase openness by - 0.5 pp in FDI as a share of GDP (to 0.2%), below average for regional peers and
                 reducing tariffs and     lower-income countries
                 increasing FDI
                 Increase access to       + 29 pp in access to formal financial services (to 90%); +32 pp for women (to 89%),
                 credit for women,        +30 pp for rural population
                 rural entrepreneurs,     + 36 pp in MSME access to formal financial services (to 87%)
                 SMEs                     + 0.44 pp in adults borrowing from formal financial institutions (to 14.17%); + 1.27 pp
                                          for adult women (to 14.10%)
Equitable        Address barriers to      62 to 68 on HOI ( ↓ inequality) to children not stunted**
acquisition      health and education 65 to 68 on HOI (↓ inequality) in children, not underweight**
and use of       posed by                 72 to 74 on HOI (↓ inequality) for children finishing 6th grade on time (age 15) **
human            remoteness, low          52 to 54 (↑ inequality) on HOI for starting 1st grade on time**
capital          income, and norms
                 Reduce high              - 9 pp in stunting rate***
                 malnutrition rates       - 8 pp in underweight***
                 Support the              + 17 pp net secondary enrollment over a decade (to 48 percent) *
                 provision of quality     + 1 pp enrollment in tertiary education to reach 14%, lowest among structural and
                 secondary health and regional peers*
                 education services       + 47% out-of-pocket expenditure for public education and +53% for private education
                 (and reduce out-of-      (primary)*
                 pocket expenditures) + 15% out-of-pocket expenditure for public education and +29% for private education
                                          (secondary)*
                                          + 10% out-of-pocket expenditure on health*
                 Support agricultural     + 7 pp access to all-year irrigation*
                 growth by improving      + 6 pp access to irrigation for farming households (to 71%) *
                 market access, and       - 4 km average distance to the main market*
                 year-round irrigation    + 4% in use of main markets in rural areas (2011) *
                                          - 9% farming households selling to the market (to 39%) *

                                                                                                                          6
                    (particularly in the
                    Tarai)



 Harnessing         Enable private sector     +29% private hydropower investments
 the                investment in
 potential of       hydropower
 natural            Increase action to        Ranks 116/135 in readiness to cope with climate change, similar to the average for
 resources          reduce                    regional peers, above structural peers
                    environmental risk
                    Improve targeting         No change in targeting, social assistance programs are not poverty-targeted.
                    and coverage of           + 12 pp coverage in categorical programs that reach the elderly, single women, and
 Increase           social protection         disabled (to 37%)
 resilience                                   +10 pp coverage in programs that include benefits through maternal and child health
 against                                      (to 24%)
 shocks                                       + 9 percent coverage of child grants
                    Enable the                + 6pp increase in access to health insurance for men and women aged 15-49
                    development of
                    insurance markets,
                    particularly in health
 Getting            Provide information,      Two-day mandatory pre-departure orientation training for all migrant workers
 more from          language, and soft        Soft skills, and language training for domestic workers
 migration          skills for migrants
                    Diversify destinations    + 3 pp increase in households with international migrants
                    for temporary             - 6 pp workers in traditional migrant destinations with unskilled jobs
                    migration                 +9 pp workers in new migrant destinations with service sector jobs
 Note 1: Objectives that are not reported due to lack of indicators that can objectively measure progress or data include (i)
 Reduce the role of social networks and nepotism in labor markets in Priority 2; (ii) Improve planning and interagency
 coordination in Priority 4; and (iii) Address constraints to private sector investment in Priority 6. Trends in firm credit
 access are not available.
 Note 2: The period for assessing change is from 2018 to 2022 where indicators come from WDI; and 2017 to 2021 from
 Findex. The period for other indicators is noted with an asterisk. * Indicators assessed over ten years, due to census
 sources or data gaps with the base year being 2011 (NLSS -III; 2013 (Enterprise surveys), and 2012 (Agricultural Census). **
 Indicators assessed over the period 2014-2019, based on the MICS survey. 2018 SCD assessed on the 2014 MICS. ***
 Indicators assessed over the period 2016-2022, based on the DHS survey. 2018 SCD assessed on the 2016 DHS.

Relevance of 2018 SCD Priorities and 2024 Reprioritization
The constraints identified in the six priority areas of the 2018 SCD remain largely relevant, starting with the
overarching risks to the current growth and welfare model. Despite welfare gains and growth that surpassed
projections, challenges remain, including reliance on international remittances, limited improvements in the
domestic private sector, low productivity, and weak job growth. Table 2 summarizes progress on the indicators
and priority areas identified in the 2018 SCD.

 Table 2: Progress on priorities and objectives outlined in the 2018 SCD
  Priority area          Progress                                     Objectives                               Progress
  Improving public       Poor         Support the transition to federalism and increase inclusiveness in the   Weak                    Legend
  institutions                        political process.
                                      Improve accountability and strengthen the rule of law.                   Weak                   Progress
                                      Support the transition to federalism and invest in capacity at the       Poor                     since
                                      subnational level.                                                                              the last
  Increasing private     Poor         Invest in infrastructure (roads and electricity).                        Moderate                  SCD
  sector investment                   Strengthen regulation and reduce government involvement in markets.      Poor         Poor
  to create more                      Increase openness by reducing tariffs and increasing foreign direct      Poor        Weak
  and better jobs                     investment.                                                                         Moderate
                                      Increase access to credit for women, rural entrepreneurs, and small      Moderate    Strong
                                      and medium-sized businesses.
  Encouraging the        Moderate     Address barriers to health and education posed by remoteness, low        Moderate
  equitable                           income, and norms
  acquisition and                     Reduce the role of social networks and nepotism in labor markets.        No data
  use of human                        Reduce high malnutrition rates.                                          Strong
  capital                             Support the provision of good-quality secondary health and education     Moderate                SCD
                                      services.                                                                                       2018
                         Weak         Support agricultural growth by improving market access and year-         Weak                  priority
                                      round irrigation.                                                                              ranking


                                                                                                                               7
Harnessing the                  Enable private sector investment in hydropower.                        Strong     1
potential of                                                                                                      2
                                Improve planning and interagency coordination.                         Poor
natural resources                                                                                                 3
Increasing           Poor       Increase action to reduce environmental risk.                          Poor       4
resilience against              Improve targeting and coverage of social protection.                   Weak       5
shocks                          Enable the development of insurance markets, particularly in health.   Moderate
Getting more         Moderate   Address constraints to private sector investment.                      Poor
from migration                  Provide information, language, and soft skills for migrants.           Weak
                                Diversify destinations for temporary migration.                        Moderate



  Nepal’s persistent vulnerability to climate shocks and uninsured risks calls for immediate actions to
  reduce risk exposures and strengthen coping mechanisms. Nepal faces high climate risks, as a result of
  structural reliance on agriculture as a source of subsistence (89 percent) and income (39 percent). Climate
  risks present a spatially differentiated challenge. The Terai/plains require direct mitigation of climate
  hazards and related damage to human life and physical assets; mountainous areas need investments in
  coping strategies. A weak policy environment for climate action and social assistance severely limits the
  capacity to mitigate and respond to shocks.xxxiv

  Harnessing the potential of natural resources will require a sector-specific approach to assess the fiscal-
  equity-sustainability tradeoffs and investments in public resource management capacity. Nepal is rich in
  natural resources, especially forest cover, water availability, and hydropower potential. These resources
  contribute very little to GDP growth, however, because of low private investment, informality, and in some
  cases the lack of established markets to trade and common property resources that are community
  managed. Assessing productivity gains and crowding in private sector investment will require a sectoral
  approach, as the fiscal-equity-sustainability tradeoffs vary across natural resource types. Sustaining
  equitable access to public forests through the involvement of inclusive forest user groups will be critical to
  both environmental sustainability and the equitable sharing of the benefits of improved productivity.

  Weak public institutions are becoming a binding constraint to progress on other priorities and the
  equitable delivery of services. Nepal has achieved many milestones toward operationalizing federalism,
  but advances have not improved government effectiveness or service delivery. Important measures of
  governance quality, such as regulatory quality and government effectiveness, were stagnant or declined
  over the past decade (see Table 2). In health and education, for example, overlaps between the three tiers
  of government remain, and reliance on conditional grants from the federal government undermines the
  devolution of service delivery. Although devolved federal funds represented 65 percent of provincial and
  local government revenues in 2021, 46 percent of those funds were tied to conditional grants.xxxv These
  constraints are compounded by a lack of adequate staffing: In FY23, 29 percent of government employee
  positions remain vacant across the three tiers of government.

  Beyond the assessment of progress, two additional criteria are used to reprioritize areas for action in this
  SCD. They include the identification of constraints that are preventing progress in other areas and relevance
  to the World Bank Group’s mission to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity on a livable planet,
  including by strengthening the alignment of priority areas with Nepal’s adoption of the Green, Resilient, and
  Inclusive Development (GRID) approach.
Areas for Action in the 2024 Streamlined SCD
  This Streamlined SCD proposes four priority areas and high-level outcomes. Priority 1—strengthening
  public sector institutions, accountability, and effectiveness—is critical to facilitate progress in other priority
  areas. Priority 2—creating an enabling policy environment for private sector-led growth and job creation—
  is reframed to emphasize the role of policies that facilitate job creation. Priorities 3 and 4 highlight the need
  to strengthen inclusion, sustainability, resilience, and climate considerations through both existing and new
  pathways to reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity on a livable planet.




                                                                                                                      8
Priority 1: Strengthening public sector institutions, accountability, and effectiveness.
High-level outcome 1: Increased and equitable access to public services and institutions

Key priorities: (i) Establish budgets, financing, and capacity that reflect federal and local mandates, and improve
intergovernmental coordination; (ii) develop and use modernized and digital systems for public procurement,
financial management, and data ecosystems, in order to improve public sector management and service
delivery; (iii) improve the effectiveness and targeting of public spending; and (iv) strengthen mechanisms for
accountability and inclusion.

 Objective i: Support the implementation        Objective ii: Improve public sector effectiveness and modernize
 of federalism with appropriate budgets,        service delivery systems.
 financing, and functional capacity.
                                                • Develop and use modernized and digital systems, to increase
 • Clarify functions, expenditure, and            transparency, efficiency, and equity in government functions
   revenue responsibilities across the            (public procurement, financial and revenue management, data
   three government tiers.                        ecosystems for public sector management, and service delivery).
 • Operationalize         intergovernmental     • Strengthen subnational capacity to plan and provision for
   coordination mechanisms and improve            business service delivery (registration, construction permits,
   coordination.                                  utility connections, property transfers, etc.)
 • Improve       intergovernmental     fiscal   • Review mandatory rotation for civil servants in key technical
   transfer formulas and mechanisms to            positions, to ensure business continuity and build capacity.
   allow more flexibility for subnational       • Strengthen public financial management and procurement
   governments to plan and spend                  through system-wide investments.
   resources to deliver services.               • Develop a revised public financial management (PFM) reform
 • Align civil service recruitment with the       strategy, improving capital spending, revenue forecasting, and
   roles of the three tiers of government         climate and gender-responsive PFM systems.
   and pass the Federal Civil Service Bill.     • Implement the fiscal federalism roadmap.
 Objective iii: Manage fiscal sustainability    Objective iv: Operationalize and strengthen mechanisms for
 and improve the effectiveness and              accountability and inclusion.
 targeting of public spending.
                                                • Monitor implementation of existing requirements on
• Improve public investment planning              transparency and citizen engagement (including periodic self-
  and align infrastructure planning across        disclosure of financial reports, seven-step planning, and
  tiers of government.                            budgeting).
• Develop capacities for project appraisal      • Remove legal and institutional barriers to equality of women
  and      monitoring      systems      and       under the law.
  procurement at all three tiers of             • Establish feedback systems for key public services that allow
  government.                                     citizens to evaluate the quality of delivery in a timely manner.
• Strengthen institutional capacity for         • Improve public access to data by establishing clear policies that
  revenue generation and management               enable data use and oversight-related planning, spending, and
  capacity, including at the provincial and       project implementation functions.
  local levels.                                 • Increase the effectiveness of oversight entities such as the Public
                                                  Accounts Committees, as well as the monitoring and evaluation
                                                  committee at the local level.
                                                • Improve implementation of annual audit recommendations.

Priority 2: Creating an enabling policy environment for private sector –led growth and job
creation.
High-level outcome 2: More and better private sector jobs

Key priorities: (i) Adopt trade and policy reforms to promote competitiveness, FDI, and productivity
growth, and improve the regulatory environment; (ii) expand and improve access to connective
infrastructure (physical and digital) and financial inclusion and strengthen the economic linkages to
hydropower; and (iii) foster urban productivity, and support the growth of secondary economic centers,
to reap agglomeration externalities.


                                                                                                                   9
Objective i: Remove distortions in the macro-policy framework         Objective ii: Expand access to physical and
and improve the business environment for the private sector.          digital connective infrastructure and access
                                                                      to finance.
• Prioritize productivity-enhancing reforms, to counter the
  effects of real exchange rate appreciation under the peg to the     • Scale up access to finance and credit,
  Indian rupee.                                                          especially for MSMEs, and support private
• Reduce or eliminate high trade costs and cascading tariffs, to         financing solutions.
  incentivize exports, and gradually reduce import taxation.          • Complement investments in physical
• Foster trade and regional integration, to better integrate Nepal       infrastructure (roads, electricity, and
  into global and regional value chains.                                 water) with digital connectivity to increase
• Ease restrictions on capital movements and international               returns to human and physical assets.
  payment flows, attract more FDI and private finance by              • Reduce spatial and socioeconomic gaps in
  streamlining processes, and pass the draft Foreign Investment          digital and financial inclusion.
  Act.                                                                • Strengthen backward and forward
• Ease regulatory constraints to doing business, including taxes,        economic linkages with the hydropower
  customs, and trade regulations.                                        sector.
                                                                      • Improve connectivity, to facilitate trade
                                                                         and hydropower exports.
Objective iii: Foster urban productivity                              Objective iv: Strengthen public-private
                                                                      collaboration for financing and investments
• Leverage potential for agglomeration economies in secondary         in Infrastructure.
  cities and emerging population growth centers.
• Strengthen institutional and financial capacity for municipal       • Improve Public Investment Management
  services and local and urban planning.                                frameworks to identify and prioritize
• Establish an institutional system for urban development that          projects, focusing on projects suitable for
  includes cabinet approval of the National Urban Policy and            delivery by the private sector.
  legislative approval of the Urban Development Act.                  • Strengthen the institutional, legal, and
                                                                        regulatory enabling environment for
                                                                        public-private partnerships, to mobilize
                                                                        private-sector        investment         in
                                                                        infrastructure.
                                                                      • Implement sectoral reforms to attract
                                                                        private participation in infrastructure (by
                                                                        for example, streamlining generation,
                                                                        transmission, and distribution and
                                                                        establishing regional power trade in the
                                                                        electricity sector).

Priority 3: Strengthening pathways for inclusive and sustainable growth and poverty reduction .
High-level outcome 3: More inclusive and sustainable returns to human, natural, and physical assets

Key priorities: (i) Sustain and improve returns to migration and leverage the skills of return migrants; (ii) support
good-quality and equitable human capital acquisition and use; (iii) support natural capital–reliant livelihoods, by
improving the productivity of water, land, and forest resources; and (iv) strengthen public delivery systems make
them inclusive.

 Objective i: Improve economic returns to migration.      Objective ii: Strengthen public capacity for equitable
                                                          delivery of health and education and align mandates
• Continue to diversify job opportunities for             with resources.
  migrants, including through bilateral agreements to
  open new destinations that provide skilled jobs.        • Establish effective financing and delivery systems for
• Invest in upskilling, including language training for     decentralized and targeted delivery.
  aspiring emigrants.                                     • Support the enactment of existing laws, including the
• Expand and strengthen pre-migration facilitation          Education Bill, the Higher Education Bill, the TVET Bill,
  services.                                                 and the National Human Resources for Health
                                                            Strategy 2021 bill.

                                                                                                                  10
• Enhance migrants’ protection, safety, and              • Collect better data to target human capital
   facilitation of remittances and financial literacy      investments and support improved service quality
   during migration.                                       and equity (gender, social, and economic).
• Reduce costs and facilitate the reintegration of       • Advance skill training and education for girls.
   return migrants into domestic labor & credit
   markets.
Objective iii: Support natural capital–reliant           Objective iv: Invest in the quality of education and
livelihoods                                              skills of labor market entrants.

• Support value addition and productivity of high-       • Improve the portability of skills through accreditation
  potential agricultural households identified based       and certification processes.
  on a socioeconomic typology.                           • Incentivize higher education institutions to develop
• Support more productive and sustainable use of           Nepal’s comparative advantages in specific job
  forest and water resources.                              sectors, through partnerships with the private sector.
• Strengthen successful modalities of natural capital    • Evaluate economic returns to ongoing skill training
  use and conservation, particularly in the forestry       programs, and identify sectors with potential for
  sector.                                                  targeted support, such as digital services.

Priority 4: Promoting a greener and more resilient future development path.
High-level outcome 4: Enhanced resilience to economic and environmental shocks

Key priorities: (i) Strengthen infrastructure climate resilience and the institutional framework for crisis and
disaster preparedness at all levels of government, (ii) strengthen household and community resilience, through
the development of shock-responsive safety nets; and (iii) improve governance for natural resource
management.

Objective i: Strengthen institutional   Objective     ii:     Strengthen    Objective iii: Improve governance for
capacity for disaster preparedness,     household, community, and           natural resource management.
management, and financing.              infrastructure resilience.
                                                                            • Strengthen local capacity and
• Clarify roles and responsibilities    • Reorient social assistance          funding      for     operations    and
  and coordination mechanisms for         systems to be scalable and to       management in the water sector.
  all levels of government.               target the poor.                  • Strengthen        land     governance
• Establish data-driven systems for     • Establish better data and           through an integrated land act and
  multihazard risk assessment, loss       systems to identify, validate,      land valuation system; pilot
  and damage, resilience planning,        and     reach      poor     and     implementation of the Land Use Act
  and disaster risk financing and         vulnerable households and           to support better land utilization.
  insurance.                              communities.                      • Develop        subnational       forest
• Improve        multihazard    early   • Strengthen resilience and           management plans based on
  warning systems, and invest in          productivity        in      the     granular      data,     and     design
  water, weather, and climate             agricultural sector.                performance-based transfers of
  services (hydro met policy and        • Strengthen       infrastructure     forest royalties from federal to
  master plan).                           resilience, including through       provincial to municipal level.
• Address climate-related health          updating building codes and       • In    the      hydropower       sector,
  risks,       strengthen      health     monitoring for compliance.          streamline        and      standardize
  information and surveillance          • Strengthen          community       processes        for     public-private
  systems, and assess climate             resilience through digital and      partnerships, reform and strengthen
  readiness of health infrastructure.     financial inclusion.                the capacity of the National
                                                                              Electricity Authority, and strengthen
                                                                              cross-border trade and investment.
                                                                            • Strengthen regional integration and
                                                                              trade links, to increase hydropower
                                                                              exports.




                                                                                                                 11
i National Statistics Office (Nepal) and World Bank Staff estimates. Nepal has effectively eradicated extreme poverty (US$2.15

per person per day poverty line, 2017 PPP). The 2022–23 poverty rates using international lines, Gini index, and the
prosperity gap are based on the 2022–23 welfare aggregate comparable with NLSS III. The same indicators with the updated
2022–23 welfare aggregate, i.e., the official estimates for 2022–23 and the benchmarks for future comparisons, are: Poverty
headcount rate is 0.37 percent (US$2.15) and 44.07 percent (US$6.85); the Gini index and prosperity gap are 30.02 and 3.78,
respectively.
ii World Bank staff estimates. The prosperity gap measures the average per capita expenditure shortfall relative to a

prosperity standard of US$25 (2017 PPP).
iii World Development Indicators. These indicators are used extensively throughout this SCD update. They are not referenced

at every instance of use because of space constraints.
iv Shrestha, M. 2017. “The Impact of Large-Scale Migration on Poverty, Expenditures, and Labor Market Outcomes in Nepal.”

World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 8232.
v World Bank Staff estimates based on Nepal Labor Force Survey 2018.
vi International tourism receipts accounted for roughly 29 percent of exports (2.3 percent of GDP) in 2019 (WDI). Direct and

indirect jobs in tourism-related sectors account for 11.5 percent of employment in establishments, but two-thirds of these
jobs were in restaurants and mobile food service establishments, which cater to a much broader customer base (Nepal
Bureau of Statistics based on NLFS 2018).
vii MICS 2019, DHS 2023.
viii World Bank Staff estimates using NLSS III and NLSS IV. All estimates from 2023 come from NLSS IV unless otherwise

indicated. They are not referenced at every instance of use because of space constraints.
ix World Bank. 2023. An Uneven Playing Field: Sub-National Disparities in Human Opportunity in Nepal; DHS Survey 2023.
x https://wbl.worldbank.org/en/wbl-data.
xi Since 2018, government spending on these sectors as a share of GDP has outpaced the average for lower-middle-income

countries.
xii World Bank Staff estimates using NLSS IV.
xiii DHS 2023.
xiv Ruppert Bulmer, E., A. Shrestha, and M. Marshalian. 2020. Nepal Jobs Diagnostic. Job Series 22, World Bank. This

document is drawn on extensively in this SCD update to inform the jobs narrative. It is not referenced at every instance of
use because of space constraints.
xv World Bank staff estimates based on NLSS IV and NLFS 2017 (based on a comparable labor module).
xvi World Bank. 2023. “Tracking the Labor Market Recovery from COVID-19 in Nepal.” Brief 1.
xvii Sapkota, S., M. Shrestha, and S. Shrestha. “Returnees: A Primer on a Data and Research Agenda for Nepal.” Unpublished

report: World Bank Staff estimate based on NLSS IV.
xviii World Bank Staff estimates based on NLSS IV; Nepal Labor Force Survey 2017.
xix World Bank. 2021. Risks to Poverty, Vulnerability, and Inequality from COVID-19: Nepal Light Poverty Assessment. This

document is used extensively throughout this SCD update. It is not referenced at every instance of use because of space
constraints.
xx World Bank. 2023. World Development Report 2023: Migrants, Refugees, and Societies.
xxi World Bank, 2022. Nepal Country Climate and Development Report.
xxii Biswokarma, J.B. 2023. Election Results 2022: Data Analytics on the Status of Gender and Social Inclusion. Dignity Initiative

Kathmandu, National Statistics Office; Nepal Housing and Population Census 2021.
xxiii Pande, R., M. Callen, S.A. Prillaman, S. Fiorin, B. Paudel, and S. Danner. 2022. Is Nepal on a Path towards Gender Inclusive

Political Leadership? An Analysis of the 2022 Local Level Elections. National Inclusion Commission. Impact of Reservation in
Existing Civil Service Report, 2079 (in Nepali), 13–15.
xxiv Nepal Economic Census 2018 for all credit and firm statistics.
xxv World Bank Enterprise Surveys, 2013 and 2023.
xxvi Nepal Economic Census 2018.
xxvii Nepal Country Private Sector Diagnostic 2018.
xxviii MICS Survey 2019.
xxix DHS 2023.
xxx The number of jobs across the hydro value chain is estimated at 5,400 (NEA 2021). Only 4 percent of Nepal’s primary

energy mix comes from hydropower, and industry consumes only 8 percent of total energy consumption (World Bank Group.
2022. Skills Needs Assessment for Green Jobs in Nepal).
xxxi Meeks, R., F.H. Thompson, and Z. Wang. 2023. “Electrification to Grow Manufacturing? Evidence from Mini grids in

Nepal.” Duke Global Working Paper 36, Duke University, Durham, NC.
xxxii Nepal Agricultural Census 2022.
xxxiii Nationally representative forestry module in NLSS-IV.
xxxiv World Bank. 2022. Nepal: Country and Climate Development Report.
xxxv World Bank. 2023. Nepal Fiscal Federalism Update; World Bank staff calculation




                                                                                                                              12
